15References
Pranjal Aggarwal, Marjan Ghazvininejad, Seungone Kim, Ilia Kulikov, Jack Lanchantin, Xian Li, Tianjian Li, Bo Liu,
Graham Neubig, Anaelia Ovalle, et al. Reasoning over mathematical objects: on-policy reward modeling and test
time aggregation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.18886, 2026.
Lakshya A Agrawal, Shangyin Tan, Dilara Soylu, Noah Ziems, Rishi Khare, Krista Opsahl-Ong, Arnav Singhvi, Herumb
Shandilya, Michael J Ryan, Meng Jiang, et al. Gepa: Reflective prompt evolution can outperform reinforcement
learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.19457, 2025.
Afra Feyza Akyürek, Advait Gosai, Chen Bo Calvin Zhang, Vipul Gupta, Jaehwan Jeong, Anisha Gunjal, Tahseen
Rabbani, Maria Mazzone, David Randolph, Mohammad Mahmoudi Meymand, et al. Prbench: Large-scale expert
rubrics for evaluating high-stakes professional reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.11562, 2025.
Ganqu Cui, Lifan Yuan, Ning Ding, Guanming Yao, Qiang Yue, Yuan Ni, Guotong Xie, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong
Sun. Ultrafeedback: Boosting language models with high-quality feedback. 2023.
Ning Ding, Yulin Chen, Bokai Xu, Yujia Qin, Shengding Hu, Zhiyuan Liu, Maosong Sun, and Bowen Zhou. Enhancing
chat language models by scaling high-quality instructional conversations. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 3029–3051, 2023.
Chrisantha Fernando, Dylan Banarse, Henryk Michalewski, Simon Osindero, and Tim Rocktäschel. Promptbreeder:
Self-referential self-improvement via prompt evolution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.16797, 2023.
Siyuan Guo, Cheng Deng, Ying Wen, Hechang Chen, Yi Chang, and Jun Wang. Ds-agent: Automated data science by
empowering large language models with case-based reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.17453, 2024.
Peter Henderson, Mark Krass, Lucia Zheng, Neel Guha, Christopher D Manning, Dan Jurafsky, and Daniel Ho. Pile of
law: Learning responsible data filtering from the law and a 256gb open-source legal dataset. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 35:29217–29234, 2022.
Sirui Hong, Yizhang Lin, Bang Liu, Bangbang Liu, Binhao Wu, Ceyao Zhang, Danyang Li, Jiaqi Chen, Jiayi Zhang,
Jinlin Wang, et al. Data interpreter: An llm agent for data science. In Findings of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: ACL 2025, pages 19796–19821, 2025.
Andrej Karpathy. autoresearch: Ai agents running research on single-gpu nanochat training automatically. https:
//github.com/karpathy/autoresearch, 2026. GitHub repository.
Zaid Khan, Elias Stengel-Eskin, Jaemin Cho, and Mohit Bansal. Dataenvgym: Data generation agents in teacher
environments with student feedback. In International Conference on Learning Representations, volume 2025, pages
53480–53507, 2025.
Yoonho Lee, Roshen Nair, Qizheng Zhang, Kangwook Lee, Omar Khattab, and Chelsea Finn. Meta-harness: End-to-end
optimization of model harnesses. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.28052, 2026.
Yuanzhi Li, Sébastien Bubeck, Ronen Eldan, Allie Del Giorno, Suriya Gunasekar, and Yin Tat Lee. Textbooks are all
you need ii: phi-1.5 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.05463, 2023.
Bo Liu, Chuanyang Jin, Seungone Kim, Weizhe Yuan, Wenting Zhao, Ilia Kulikov, Xian Li, Sainbayar Sukhbaatar,
Jack Lanchantin, and Jason Weston. Spice: Self-play in corpus environments improves reasoning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2510.24684, 2025.
Kyle Lo, Lucy Lu Wang, Mark Neumann, Rodney Kinney, and Daniel S Weld. S2orc: The semantic scholar open
research corpus. In Proceedings of the 58th annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics, pages
4969–4983, 2020.
Chris Lu, Cong Lu, Robert Tjarko Lange, Jakob Foerster, Jeff Clune, and David Ha. The ai scientist: Towards fully
automated open-ended scientific discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.06292, 2024.
Alisia Lupidi, Carlos Gemmell, Nicola Cancedda, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Jason Weston, Jakob Foerster, Roberta Raileanu,
and Maria Lomeli. Source2synth: Synthetic data generation and curation grounded in real data sources. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2409.08239, 2024.
Tianyi Ma, Yiyue Qian, Zheyuan Zhang, Zehong Wang, Xiaoye Qian, Feifan Bai, Yifan Ding, Xuwei Luo, Shinan
Zhang, Keerthiram Murugesan, et al. Autodata: A multi-agent system for open web data collection. Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, 38:173416–173448, 2026.
16Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Prakhar Gupta, Skyler Hallinan, Luyu Gao, Sarah Wiegreffe, Uri Alon, Nouha Dziri,
Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yiming Yang, et al. Self-refine: Iterative refinement with self-feedback. Advances in neural
information processing systems, 36:46534–46594, 2023.
Arindam Mitra, Luciano Del Corro, Guoqing Zheng, Shweti Mahajan, Dany Rouhana, Andres Codas, Yadong Lu,
Wei-ge Chen, Olga Vrousgos, Corby Rosset, et al. Agentinstruct: Toward generative teaching with agentic flows.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.03502, 2024.
Subhabrata Mukherjee, Arindam Mitra, Ganesh Jawahar, Sahaj Agarwal, Hamid Palangi, and Ahmed Awadallah.
Orca: Progressive learning from complex explanation traces of gpt-4. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.02707, 2023.
Vedant Shah, Dingli Yu, Kaifeng Lyu, Simon Park, Jiatong Yu, Yinghui He, Nan Rosemary Ke, Michael Mozer, Yoshua
Bengio, Sanjeev Arora, et al. Ai-assisted generation of difficult math questions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21009,
2024.
Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Junxiao Song, Xiao Bi, Haowei Zhang, Mingchuan Zhang, YK Li,
Yang Wu, et al. Deepseekmath: Pushing the Limits of Mathematical Reasoning in Open Language Models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2402.03300, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.03300.
Shubham Toshniwal, Wei Du, Ivan Moshkov, Branislav Kisacanin, Alexan Ayrapetyan, and Igor Gitman.
Openmathinstruct-2: Accelerating ai for math with massive open-source instruction data. In International Conference
on Learning Representations, volume 2025, pages 19243–19275, 2025.
Yizhong Wang, Yeganeh Kordi, Swaroop Mishra, Alisa Liu, Noah A Smith, Daniel Khashabi, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi.
Self-instruct: Aligning language models with self-generated instructions. In Proceedings of the 61st annual meeting
of the association for computational linguistics (volume 1: long papers), pages 13484–13508, 2023.
Jason Weston and Jakob Foerster. Ai & human co-improvement for safer co-superintelligence. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2512.05356, 2025.
Can Xu, Qingfeng Sun, Kai Zheng, Xiubo Geng, Pu Zhao, Jiazhan Feng, Chongyang Tao, Qingwei Lin, and Daxin
Jiang. Wizardlm: Empowering large pre-trained language models to follow complex instructions. In International
Conference on Learning Representations, volume 2024, pages 30745–30766, 2024.
Zhangchen Xu, Fengqing Jiang, Luyao Niu, Yuntian Deng, Radha Poovendran, Yejin Choi, and Bill Yuchen Lin.
Magpie: Alignment data synthesis from scratch by prompting aligned llms with nothing. In International Conference
on Learning Representations, volume 2025, pages 76346–76382, 2025.
Chengrun Yang, Xuezhi Wang, Yifeng Lu, Hanxiao Liu, Quoc V Le, Denny Zhou, and Xinyun Chen. Large language
models as optimizers. In International Conference on Learning Representations, volume 2024, pages 12028–12068,
2024.
Longhui Yu, Weisen Jiang, Han Shi, Jincheng Yu, Zhengying Liu, Yu Zhang, James Kwok, Zhenguo Li, Adrian
Weller, and Weiyang Liu. Metamath: Bootstrap your own mathematical questions for large language models. In
International Conference on Learning Representations, volume 2024, pages 45040–45061, 2024.
Ping Yu, Jack Lanchantin, Tianlu Wang, Weizhe Yuan, Olga Golovneva, Ilia Kulikov, Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, Jason
Weston, and Jing Xu. Cot-self-instruct: Building high-quality synthetic prompts for reasoning and non-reasoning
tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.23751, 2025.
Weizhe Yuan, Richard Yuanzhe Pang, Kyunghyun Cho, Xian Li, Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, Jing Xu, and Jason E Weston.
Self-rewarding language models. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.
Weizhe Yuan, Jane Yu, Song Jiang, Karthik Padthe, Yang Li, Ilia Kulikov, Kyunghyun Cho, Dong Wang, Yuandong
Tian, Jason E Weston, et al. Naturalreasoning: Reasoning in the wild with 2.8 m challenging questions. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2502.13124, 2025.
Xiang Yue, Xingwei Qu, Ge Zhang, Yao Fu, Wenhao Huang, Huan Sun, Yu Su, and Wenhu Chen. Mammoth: Building
math generalist models through hybrid instruction tuning. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
volume 2024, pages 40320–40341, 2024.
Eric Zelikman, Yuhuai Wu, Jesse Mu, and Noah Goodman. Star: Bootstrapping reasoning with reasoning. Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:15476–15488, 2022.
Andrew Zhao, Yiran Wu, Yang Yue, Tong Wu, Quentin Xu, Matthieu Lin, Shenzhi Wang, Qingyun Wu, Zilong Zheng,
and Gao Huang. Absolute zero: Reinforced self-play reasoning with zero data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.03335,
2025a.
17Wenting Zhao, Pranjal Aggarwal, Swarnadeep Saha, Asli Celikyilmaz, Jason Weston, and Ilia Kulikov. The majority
is not always right: Rl training for solution aggregation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.06870, 2025b.
Yifei Zhou, Sergey Levine, Jason Weston, Xian Li, and Sainbayar Sukhbaatar. Self-challenging language model agents.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.01716, 2025.
18A Token Efficiency and Truncation in Principa Experiments
We analyze the impact of training on token efficiency by examining truncation rates (responses where
finish_reason=length) and attributing accuracy improvements to truncation reduction versus improved
reasoning.
A.1 Truncation Rates
In our experiments, we set the reasoning token budget to 65,536 tokens. Table 8 shows truncation rates
across different training configurations. The base Qwen3.5-4B model exhibits high truncation rates (23.75%
on combined validation, 17.06% on Principia benchmark), indicating that many responses exceed even this
generous 65K token budget before the model can complete its reasoning. Training substantially reduces
truncation: Agentic Self-Instruct reduces truncation to 4.09% and 1.85% respectively, while Grounding
achieves 10.00% and 6.62%. This suggests that training teaches the model to reason more concisely and
efficiently within the token budget.
Table 8 Truncation rates (finish_reason=length) across training configurations with a 65,536 token reasoning budget.
Training substantially improves token efficiency, with Agentic Self-Instruct achieving the lowest truncation rates.
Model Combined-Val Principia Bench
Qwen3.5-4B (base) 23.75% 17.06%
+ Grounding 10.00% 6.62%
+ Agentic 4.09% 1.85%
+ Combined 3.37% 1.67%
A.2 Attribution of Accuracy Improvements
To understand the source of accuracy gains, we perform an attribution analysis on the agentic validation
subset (816 QA items × 8 generations = 6,528 paired generations). For each generation that flipped from
incorrect (base model) to correct (trained model), we categorize the improvement into three sources:
• Truncation-fixed: The base model was truncated but the trained model completed successfully.
• Non-truncation reasoning: Neither was truncated, but the trained model reasoned correctly.
• Other: Remaining cases (e.g., both truncated but trained model still correct).
Results are shown in Table 9. Across all training configurations, approximately 50% of accuracy improvements
come from fixing truncation issues. For Agentic Self-Instruct, 54.81% of the 945 flipped generations are
attributed to truncation fixes, while 41.06% are attributed to improved reasoning on non-truncated examples.
This indicates that learning to reason efficiently within the 65K token budget is a major contributor to
performance gains, alongside improvements in reasoning quality itself.
Table 9 Attribution of accuracy improvements on the agentic validation subset. ∆Acc: accuracy change vs. base model.
∆Trunc: truncation rate change. Truncation-fixed share indicates the fraction of incorrect→correct flips attributable
to resolving truncation.
Model Accuracy ∆Acc Trunc. ∆Trunc
Incorrect→Correct Attribution
Trunc-fixed Non-trunc Other
+ Agentic 56.79% +4.84 6.43% −27.65 518 (54.81%) 388 (41.06%) 39 (4.13%)
+ Grounding 56.33% +4.38 15.82% −18.26 441 (47.83%) 367 (39.80%) 114 (12.36%)
+ Combined 55.88% +3.94 5.06% −29.03 511 (54.71%) 390 (41.76%) 33 (3.53%)
Implications. These findings suggest that long-form reasoning models like Qwen3.5-4B often fail not because
they lack reasoning ability, but because they run out of tokens before completing their chain of thought—even
with a generous 65,536 token budget. Training on challenging data—particularly Agentic Self-Instruct data—
teaches the model to reason more concisely, effectively converting verbose reasoning patterns into efficient ones.
19This highlights an underappreciated benefit of synthetic data training: beyond improving reasoning quality, it
also improves reasoning efficiency, enabling the model to solve more problems within fixed computational
budgets.
B Question Type Analysis for Principia Grounded Agentic Self-Instruct Data
B.1 Annotation Procedure
To characterize the reasoning demands of the generated questions, we annotated a random sample of 1,000
verified QA pairs drawn from the full agentic data. We used a two-phase LLM-based annotation pipeline
(Kimi-K2.6):
1. Taxonomydiscovery. We sampled 200 items stratified by challenge score, presented them to the model in
batches of 20, and asked it to propose question-type categories with definitions and examples. The 98
raw proposals were consolidated into 11 non-overlapping types.
2. Annotation. Each of the 1,000 items was classified into exactly one of the 11 types using the discovered
taxonomy. 687 items received valid annotations after filtering parsing failures.
B.2 Question Types
We organize the 11 types into three categories.
Reasoning — questions requiring multi-step derivation, analysis, or proof:
• Multi-Step Symbolic & Analytical Derivation. Chaining algebraic or calculus manipulations to derive a
closed-form expression from given models.
• Combinatorial, Discrete & Structural Analysis. Counting configurations, analyzing finite structures, or
determining combinatorial invariants.
• Probabilistic, Stochastic & Dynamical Analysis. Solving probabilistic models or dynamical systems for
distributions, expectations, or steady states.
• Spectral, Stability, Eigenvalue & Optimization Analysis. Finding eigenvalues, critical points, or extremal
values; analyzing stability via characteristic equations.
• Asymptotic, Scaling & Perturbative Analysis. Extracting limiting behaviors, power-law scalings, or
perturbative corrections in extreme regimes.
• Proof, Formal Justification & Verification. Constructing rigorous arguments to prove or disprove a claim.
Knowledge — questions answerable by recall or direct formula application:
• Direct Formula, Identity & Theorem Application. Selecting a known formula or theorem and substituting
parameters in one or two steps.
• Factual & Definitional Recall. Retrieving an established fact, constant, or definition without derivation.
Mixed — questions combining domain knowledge with procedural or modeling skills:
• Physical Modeling & First-Principles Synthesis. Translating a physical scenario into governing equations
and solving them.
• Algorithmic & Procedural Computation. Executing a defined multi-step procedure (e.g., matrix inversion,
numerical integration).
• Data-Driven Inference & Parameter Extraction. Inferring quantities from provided data, fits, or observa-
tions.
B.3 Distribution
Table 10 shows the distribution of question types in our annotated sample.
Roughly half of the questions are reasoning-dominant, about a quarter are mixed, and one-fifth are knowledge-
oriented. This distribution suggests that our Agentic Self-Instruct pipeline successfully generates questions
20Table 10 Distribution of question types in the annotated sample of 687 Principia questions.
Question Type Category Count %
Multi-Step Symbolic & Analytical Derivation Reasoning 167 24.3
Physical Modeling & First-Principles Synthesis Mixed 100 14.6
Direct Formula, Identity & Theorem Application Knowledge 93 13.5
Combinatorial, Discrete & Structural Analysis Reasoning 77 11.2
Algorithmic & Procedural Computation Mixed 75 10.9
Factual & Definitional Recall Knowledge 46 6.7
Probabilistic, Stochastic & Dynamical Analysis Reasoning 43 6.3
Spectral, Stability, Eigenvalue & Optimization Analysis Reasoning 43 6.3
Asymptotic, Scaling & Perturbative Analysis Reasoning 23 3.3
Data-Driven Inference & Parameter Extraction Mixed 16 2.3
Proof, Formal Justification & Verification Reasoning 4 0.6
Table 11 Aggregate distribution by category.
Category Count %
Reasoning 357 52.0
Mixed 191 27.8
Knowledge 139 20.2
that emphasize multi-step reasoning over simple recall, which aligns with our goal of creating challenging
training data that separates weak and strong solvers.
C Subagent System Prompts
This appendix reproduces the system prompts driving each subagent in the Agentic Self-Instruct pipelines
reported in Sections 3.1 and 3.2. The CS pipeline (subsection C.1) uses three subagents (main agent, challenger,
quality verifier); the Legal pipeline (subsection C.2) uses four subagents (main agent, extractor, question-and-
rubric writer, loop-judge). The prompts are reproduced from the repository’s .opencode/prompts/ directories;
the wrapper format (role, workflow, output schema) is preserved across subagents within each setting.
C.1 CS subagent prompts
The CS pipeline orchestrates three subagents on a single CS paper. The main agent (Figure 7) runs the
challenger → quality-verifier → evaluate-rubric loop and decides when a question is accepted. The challenger
(Figure 8) reads the paper and produces a question, reference answer, and weighted rubric. The quality verifier
(Figure 9) checks for answer-leakage, recall versus reasoning, and rubric well-formedness.
C.2 Legal subagent prompts
The legal pipeline uses four subagents on a single legal document. The main agent (Figure 10) orchestrates
the other three and drives the agentic loop. The extractor (Figure 11) reads the document and decides both
whether it is suitable raw material and what to extract. The question-and-rubric writer (Figure 12) treats the
document as a SOURCE OF LAW and writes one realistic client- voiced question paired with a weighted
rubric and a declaration of which legal-reasoning capabilities the round targets. The loop-judge (Figure 13)
reads the per-rollout solver patterns plus the rubric and returns the structured accept/improve verdict (and,
on improve, a suggestion_for_writer) that drives the next round.
C.3 Scientific reasoning prompts
21Table 12 Legal RL training results evaluated on PRBench (normalized scores). Same models, training setup, and test
sets as Table 4; the only change is the scoring formula. Normalized scores credit avoiding negative criteria explicitly
(denominator spans worst → best), see Akyürek et al. (2025) for details.
GPT-5 Grader Kimi-K2.6 Grader
Response Model Legal Legal-Hard Legal Legal-Hard
Qwen3.5-4B (no RL) 0.329 0.241 0.296 0.219
Qwen3.5-397B (no RL) 0.446 0.341 0.402 0.294
Qwen3.5-4B RL on CoT Self-Instruct 0.422 0.320 0.389 0.300
Qwen3.5-4B RL on Agentic Self-Instruct 0.482 0.377 0.436 0.331
CS Main Agent
Role. Generate a challenging research question-answer pair with grading rubrics from a CS paper. The paper text is in the
task prompt.
Goal. Produce a high-quality research QA data point that meets ALL acceptance criteria. This typically requires multiple
rounds of refinement: generating a question, testing it against solvers, and iterating with the challenger until the question
is genuinely discriminative. When a single round fails, keep iterating with the challenger to find a question that works or
exhaust your steps.
Your role. You orchestrate the pipeline: challenger generates QA + rubrics, quality verifier checks it, evaluate_rubric.py
tests it against solvers. You do NOT interpret the paper yourself: pass it to the challenger.
Workflow. Repeat until a question is ACCEPTED or you run out of steps: (1) call challenger to generate QA + rubrics; (2)
call quality verifier; (3) if QV fails, go back to (1) with feedback; (4) write eval_input.json and run evaluate_rubric.py
–weak-only; (5) if weak fails, go back to (1) with feedback; (6) run evaluate_rubric.py –strong-only; (7) check strong
criteria and gap; if fails, go back to (1); (8) if ALL criteria pass, ACCEPTED, write final result.json.
CRITICAL. You MUST run evaluate_rubric.py on EVERY question that passes QV. Do NOT stop after generating a
refined question: you must test it. A question is ACCEPTED only when ALL of the following are true: (i) QV passed;
(ii) –weak-only reported WEAK_PASSED (weak_avg ≤ 65%, max_weak ≤ 75%, no zeros); (iii) –strong-only reported
strong_avg ≥ 60% AND strong_avg < 95%; (iv) gap (strong_avg − weak_avg) ≥ 20%.
Calling the challenger. The challenger reads the paper from ./paper.txt directly. Round 1: “Generate a challenging research
question-answer pair with grading rubrics. The paper is available at ./paper.txt: read it first.” Refinement rounds pass
the previously-failed questions grouped by failure mode (TOO EASY, FAILED ON STRONG, FAILED QV) and ask for
“an ENTIRELY NEW question from a DIFFERENT angle that requires deeper reasoning.”
Handling errors. SOLVER_ERROR or empty-response from evaluate_rubric.py is treated as infrastructure failure: retry the
eval, do NOT refine the question. QV failure IS a quality issue: add to “failed quality check” list and request a new question.
Output. Write output/result.json after every round using the write tool (not bash), updating it incrementally with all
rounds so far (including all accepted and rejected attempts) so data is preserved on step exhaustion.
Figure 7 CS main agent system prompt.
22CS Challenger
Role. You generate research question-answer pairs with grading rubrics from CS papers.
Before you start. Read the full paper by running cat ./paper.txt. You MUST read the paper before generating anything.
What to generate. Given a paper, produce: (1) a question type (short phrase, e.g. “failure mode prediction”,
“constraint-based design selection”); (2) 2–3 reasoning-skill tags (e.g. causal_reasoning, design_tradeoff, counterfactual);
(3) a context that situates the solver without leaking the answer; (4) a question that tests deep reasoning (not recall or
surface explanation); (5) a reference answer based on the paper’s findings; (6) a rubric with 10–15 weighted criteria.
Question constraints. Single (not multi-part). Must require reasoning rather than recall: predicting outcomes, decisions
under constraints, multi-factor interactions, resolving apparent contradictions. “Explain why X works” and “explain how
X fails” phrasings are too easy (weak models score ∼74% on these) and must be avoided.
Context constraint (no answer leakage). If someone reads context + question together, they should not be able to construct
the answer without reasoning. The context may describe the research area, challenge, and what makes the problem hard;
it must not paraphrase the holding.
Rubric design. Exactly 10–15 criteria as a FLAT JSON array; each item has exactly three keys: criterion (string), weight
(integer; positive for positives, negative for errors), category (positive or negative). Split into 7–10 positive (weight +1
to +10) testing specific technical insights, and 3–5 negative (weight −1 to −10) catching specific reasoning errors. Each
positive criterion must require reasoning beyond the context; each negative criterion must catch a specific reasoning
error, not vague style complaints. Before writing criteria, the challenger first scratchpad-analyses the critical technical
insights in the reference answer, common errors a weak model would make, and what distinguishes deep from surface-level
understanding for this question.
Refinement. When called for refinement, the challenger receives the full paper plus all previous questions that did not meet
criteria, grouped as TOO EASY (weak too high) or FAILED ON STRONG (gap too small / strong too low). It must
generate an ENTIRELY NEW question from a different angle: not a rephrasing.
Figure 8 CS challenger system prompt.
CS Quality Verifier
Role. Verify whether a research QA package tests genuine reasoning. Receives the context, question, rubric, and
question_type from the main agent.
Before you start. Read the full paper by running cat ./paper.txt. You MUST read the paper before verifying anything.
Check 1: Context + Question Leakage. Read context AND question together. Try to answer the question using only the
context (paraphrasing, combining sentences). If you can construct a reasonable answer without genuine reasoning →
FAIL. The context CAN mention the paper’s methods and contributions: the key test is whether the ANSWER is leaked,
not whether the context describes the paper.
Check 2: Question quality. Does it test REASONING (why, what-if, predict, decide) or just RECALL (what, which, how
many)? Is it a single focused question, not multi-part? Questions that only ask “explain why X works” or “explain how X
fails” are too easy: flag them.
Check 3: Rubric quality (STRICT, count and reject if ANY fail). Positive criteria (weight > 0) must be ≥ 4. Negative criteria
(weight < 0) must be ≥ 3. Total criteria must be in [10, 20]; reject if < 10. Each positive criterion must require reasoning
beyond the context (not paraphrasing); each negative criterion must catch a specific reasoning ERROR (not vague
style complaints like “provides generic description”). Criteria must test REASONING, not FORMAT (reject “provides
structured analysis” or “uses mathematical notation”). The verifier must report exact counts: “Positive: X, Negative: Y,
Total: Z”.
Check 4: Question type consistency. Does the question_type label match the actual question?
Output. CHECK_1_VERDICT (NO_LEAKAGE / LEAKS_ANSWER); CHECK_2_VERDICT (GOOD / TOO_EASY / RECALL); CHECK_3_VERDICT (PASS
/ FAIL) with CHECK_3_ISSUES listing specific rubric problems; CHECK_4_VERDICT (CONSISTENT / INCONSISTENT); then OVERALL:
PASS or FAIL with FEEDBACK listing the specific issues to fix.
Figure 9 CS quality-verifier system prompt.
23Legal Main Agent (Orchestrator)
Role. Generate a challenging legal question + grading rubric training data point from a single legal document (provided in
the task prompt and at ./legal_doc.txt). Hard cap: stop after 15 IMPROVE rounds.
Goal. Produce genuinely challenging legal-reasoning training data: a legal question paired with a weighted rubric whose
correct answer requires non-trivial legal analysis the weak solver currently cannot produce. The acceptance criteria below
are a quality signal, NOT a target to game.
Architecture(3-subagentpipeline+improvementloop). Round 1: (1) call extractor (writes ./extract.json with {document_type,
topic_keywords, issues, facts, holdings}); (2) call question_and_rubric_writer (returns {target_capabilities,
question, rubric}); (3) write eval_input.json, run evaluate_rubric.py once (5 weak + 3 strong rollouts in parallel, scored
per-criterion by Kimi); (4) assemble a diagnostic packet (aggregate weak/strong/gap, per-rollout scores, per-capability
table, post-filter flags); (5) call loop_judge with the packet; (6) apply the two-layer decision policy. Improvement
rounds REUSE ./extract.json and call the writer with MODE: IMPROVE plus the diagnostic packet and the loop-judge’s
verdict_reason + suggestion_for_writer (the most actionable signal, passed through verbatim).
Decision policy (two layers). Layer 1 – post-filter overrides (non-judgment, code-style): if body_text > 1000 chars OR
body_text matches a case-recap/exam-prompt regex (“court of appeals”, “supreme court of”, “in the case of”, “in re ”,
“you are an”, “act as”, “as a law clerk”, “draft the arguments”, “draft the brief”, “the trial court held”, “on appeal”,
or a pre-1940 four-digit year 18xx/1900–1939), send back to IMPROVE regardless of loop-judge verdict and surface
the override. Layer 2 – defer to the loop-judge: accept → ACCEPT; improve → next IMPROVE round, passing the
loop-judge’s suggestion_for_writer to the writer. The loop-judge defaults to improve when uncertain; do NOT overrule
an improve verdict by accepting on aggregate-score reasoning. HARD STOP: once a round is accepted, write final
result.json with final_accepted_round set and stop.
Suitability early-exit. After the Round-1 extract, read ./extract.json and check suitable_for_synthetic_question. If
false, write ./output/result.json with skipped: true and skip_reason: doc_not_suitable, do not call the writer, do not
run any evaluation.
Diagnostic packet (assembled before each loop-judge call). Per-criterion data is loaded from the eval’s criterion_diagnostics
(criterion text, weight, weak_scores_per_rollout [5], weak_avg, strong_scores_per_rollout [3], strong_avg, n_passed_weak,
n_passed_strong); criteria are grouped by their capability tag and reduced to (n_criteria, weak_cap_score, strong_-
cap_score, cap_gap) per tag; body_length, body_length_concern, and case_recap_match are passed in as quality concerns
(not auto-fails). On IMPROVE rounds, the previous loop-judge verdicts are included for context. Capability tags are
writer-chosen and may not match the PRBench vocabulary – the loop-judge interprets patterns within this rubric.
Output. Write ./output/result.json (write tool, not bash) after every round, updated incrementally. Save capability_-
scores, post_filter_flags, post_filter_overrides, and the full loop_judge_verdict JSON on every round so downstream
consumers can see how the rubric evolved and what the judge thought at each step. The result.json schema must be valid
JSON (no [. . . ], no <truncated>); inner quotes escaped, braces balanced.
Figure 10 Legal main agent (orchestrator) system prompt.
24Legal Challenger (Extractor)
Role. You are a legal document analyzer. You are the FIRST step of a 3-subagent generation pipeline (extract → question
+ rubric → loop-judge).
What this pipeline does. Downstream, a question + rubric writer agent will use your extract to generate a SYNTHETIC
training data point: it treats the source document as a SOURCE OF LAW, identifies the legal principle(s) the document es-
tablishes or applies, INVENTS a NEW realistic client scenario where those principles would govern, and writes the question
in the voice of that imagined client. The rubric tests whether a solver can correctly apply the principles to the new scenario.
Your role. Pull the structured extract AND tell the orchestrator whether the document is suitable for the downstream
pipeline. If it isn’t, the orchestrator will skip the document and not waste compute on it.
What to do. (1) Read ./legal_doc.txt; (2) decide suitable_for_synthetic_question; (3) extract the structured JSON;
(4) write the JSON to ./extract.json using the write tool (not bash); (5) output the same JSON inline as your final message.
Mark suitable when the document. (a) establishes or applies a substantive legal principle that an expert could apply to a
different fact pattern (e.g. “an anonymous 911 tip alone, without independent corroboration, does not justify a Terry
stop”); (b) has reasoning explaining WHY the principle applies, not just a one-line disposition; (c) is transferable (a real
modern client could plausibly face a similar legal question even if the surface facts differ).
Markunsuitablewhenthedocumentis. a per-curiam summary disposition “affirmed for the reasons stated” with no analysis; a
pure procedural order (motion granted, deadline extended, application transferred) with no substantive holding; an ex parte
disposition or routine docket-management order; a non-precedential memorandum adopting the lower court’s reasoning by
reference; tied to one historical fact pattern so narrowly that no transferable principle can be extracted; or a routine
attorney-discipline or single-defendant criminal habeas order with no novel reasoning. When in doubt, lean toward true:
downstream gates filter low-quality questions. We mark false only when the document is clearly not the right raw material.
Extract content (when suitable). Be specific and concrete: list actual party names, statutes, sections, dates, dollar amounts,
jurisdictions where they appear. issues are the legal questions decided (e.g. “Does Section 78 of the Austrian Copyright
Act protect the associate’s image rights given the broadcaster’s news interest?”), NOT abstract topics (“freedom of
expression”). holdings are the specific conclusions with reasoning, NOT one-word verdicts. facts is 2–3 paragraphs of
operative facts (parties, jurisdiction, procedural posture, key dates, conduct at issue). topic_keywords is 3–5 short tags
useful for grouping documents.
Output schema. {suitable_for_synthetic_question, suitability_note, document_type, topic_keywords, issues, facts,
holdings}. For non-decisional documents (memos, contracts, advisory opinions), substitute “key provisions / guidance /
obligations” for holdings. Write ./extract.json with valid JSON, then return ONLY the JSON in the final message.
Figure 11 Legal extractor system prompt.
25Legal Challenger (Question + Rubric Writer)
Role. You are an expert legal professional creating training data. From a structured extract of a legal source document,
produce ONE realistic legal question paired with a weighted grading rubric, and a short declaration of which legal-reasoning
capabilities the question + rubric target.
What to do. Read ./extract.json (and ./legal_doc.txt only if the extract is not enough). Output a single JSON object
{target_capabilities, question, rubric} and nothing else.
PART 1 – Generate the question. Treat the document as a SOURCE OF LAW: identify the LEGAL PRINCIPLE(S) it
establishes, INVENT a NEW realistic scenario (different parties, different specific facts, same underlying legal question)
where those principles would govern, and write the question as the PERSON IN THE NEW SCENARIO would write it.
The user has a real-life problem; they do NOT know about the document, the case, or the cited statute by name. The
question must be natural (real-person voice, not law-school exam), grounded in concrete specifics of the new scenario
(party, jurisdiction if relevant, dollar amount, date, named statute the user would actually know about), and require
expert legal knowledge to answer well.
What “challenging” really means (soft guidance). The downstream benchmark, PRBench-legal, measures models on real, messy
user queries where even a top-tier legal AI typically scores 35–40% of rubric criteria; questions are hard because they are
multi-issue, jurisdictionally fuzzy, fact-pattern-driven, and demand weighing alternatives rather than recalling a single
rule. Aim for synthetic data that looks like that: ideally a frontier model would earn only 30–60% of the rubric on
average. Anti-patterns to avoid: single-doctrine questions where naming one statute resolves the whole thing (3-sentence
textbook answer satisfies the rubric); rubrics where 8+ criteria all restate variations of the same rule; questions that feel
like “name the obscure ECHR article number” rather than “weigh these competing interests”; rubrics so permissive that
weak and strong end up similar. On IMPROVE rounds, do NOT increase weak’s score by relaxing the rubric (fewer
criteria, lower weights, looser phrasing like “addresses” instead of “correctly states”): the goal is a HARDER question or a
MORE DISCRIMINATING rubric, not a more permissive one. The PRBench numbers (4B = 24.5%, 397B = 35.8%) are
calibration anchors, not targets to chase.
Voice rules. DO. Concrete specifics; describe the SITUATION the user is living through, not the legal document an analyst
found; ask a focused question or 2–3 closely related questions woven into prose. DO NOT. Quote paragraphs from the
underlying document; recite case captions, judge names, court level, or docket numbers; write meta-instructions to the
solver model (“Please consider doctrines such as...”, “Walk me through the two independent grounds...”); pre-state
what the answer will involve.
PART 2 – Generate the rubric. 15–25 criteria; pick a count that fits the question’s complexity. Each criterion is specific and
verifiable, answerable from the document’s holdings and facts, and carries a capability tag (short snake_case) identifying
the legal-reasoning skill it tests. Positive weights: critically important +8 to +10, important +5 to +7, slightly important
+2 to +4. Negative weights: −1 to −10, matched to severity. Include at least one negative criterion (typically 1–3). Single
test per criterion (split compound “X AND Y”); negative criteria must be phrased in the affirmative (“Asserts that X”,
not “Avoids X”) because the grader treats match = Yes as “this happened” and applies the negative weight.
Source document as SOURCE OF LAW. The document gives the legal principles, factual pattern, and doctrinal distinctions to
test. The solver does NOT have the source document. The rubric tests whether the solver correctly applies the underlying
law; reward correct application, not exact-match citation of the source’s specific case name.
PART 3 – Declare target capabilities. primary_focus is 2–4 short snake_case capability tags identifying the central
legal-reasoning skills; secondary_focus is 1–3 capability tags exercised in a smaller way; rewards_summary is one sentence
on what the positive criteria reward; penalises_summary is one sentence on what the negative criteria penalise.
Improvement (MODE: IMPROVE). The main agent passes: the previous question (verbatim) and target_capabilities;
aggregate scores (weak_avg, strong_avg, gap, num_valid_weak, num_valid_strong); a per-capability score table
(n_criteria, weak%, strong%, gap%, sorted by weak ascending); a loop-judge analysis (grpo_suitability, weak_pattern,
strong_pattern, gap_interpretation, rubric_concerns, verdict_reason); and the loop-judge’s suggestion_for_writer, the
most actionable input. Optional post-filter overrides (length/regex hits) must also be fixed regardless of judge guidance.
Act on gap_interpretation: knowledge ceiling → shift toward reasoning over facts in the question, drop recall-pinned
criteria; saturation → demand more (multi-step doctrine application, distinguishing similar doctrines, edge cases); unfertile
mid-zone → pivot to a different angle on the same source material; subjective rubric → tighten with concrete tests. Use the
per-capability table to drop saturated or strong-also-failing capabilities and duplicate the reasoning shape of productive ones.
Invariants every round MUST satisfy. Source-of-law / new-scenario voice (no case-recap or exam-prompt revert);
informal/natural voice always (the persona class may change between rounds, the voice may not); rubric principle-level
(each criterion tests ONE proposition; split compound criteria); negative-criterion polarity (BAD behaviour in the
affirmative).
Output format. Exactly one JSON object {target_capabilities, question, rubric}, no markdown fences, no surrounding
text. Each rubric item has exactly six keys: number, criterion, category, capability, weight_class, weight. Output is
parsed with json.loads(): escape inner quotes with \", balance braces, no trailing commas, no comments.
Figure 12 Legal challenger (question-and-rubric writer) system prompt.
26Legal Judge
Role. Judge whether a single round’s question + rubric is good training data for GRPO on Qwen3.5-4B targeting
PRBench-legal performance. Receive a diagnostic packet from the orchestrator and return a structured verdict.
Context the judge reasons from. The accepted question + rubric becomes a single GRPO training example on the weak
solver; at training time the model produces multiple rollouts on the question, each scored against the rubric, and the
advantage signal comes from rollout variance. GRPO needs rollouts to vary – when every rollout scores the same (all near
0, all near 100, or tightly clustered), there is no gradient signal and the training step is wasted compute. This is the
central property good data must have. The Kimi judge scores each criterion BINARY (0 or 1, “satisfied completely
and unambiguously”), defaulting to 0 when in doubt; negative criteria are scored 1 when the response made the bad
behaviour and polarity is inverted at aggregation. The downstream legal-reasoning benchmark uses messy multi-issue
user queries where a top-tier model typically covers ∼35–40% of a rubric, so a strong solver landing far above that is a
soft hint the question may be cleaner or more single-doctrine than what the benchmark measures. Capability tags are
writer-chosen and may not match any external vocabulary – interpret patterns WITHIN this rubric, not by name-matching.
Reasoning norms. MUST reason explicitly about what the per-rollout pattern shows. “Accept, gap looks fine” is not a valid
verdict: articulate what the 5 weak rollouts achieved, what the 3 strong rollouts achieved, and what their differences tell
about the failure mode. When the rollout pattern is ambiguous or you cannot tell whether this item would produce useful
gradient signal, default to improve – bad training data degrades the RL model; an IMPROVE round is cheap relative to a
wasted training example. Be strict when uncertain. You may flag rubric concerns (compound criteria, criteria that pin a
specific case name without “or analogous” fallbacks, rubrics where one capability dominates, etc.) even if the aggregate
numbers look fine.
Soft signals to weigh. Strong solver saturating the rubric hints at single-doctrine / recall-pinned questions: if the
strong solver easily nails 70–90% of the rubric, the question likely tests “know this statute and restate it” rather than
judgment-demanding reasoning we want to train; combined with a rubric where most criteria restate one statute in
different phrasings, lean improve and prescribe a pivot to multi-issue / ambiguous-fact / weighing-alternatives content.
Meaningful weak-vs-strong gap is the fairness guardrail: near-zero gap is a soft red flag that the rubric is not separating
reasoning ability (both models guessing, or rubric awards credit too generously); a meaningful gap (strong visibly
out-reasons weak by a real margin without being saturated) is evidence the rubric actually discriminates. Weak near zero
on every rollout suggests a knowledge floor; if the rubric is recall-pinned and weak is all-zero, the gap is a knowledge
ceiling we cannot train through – lean improve and pivot to reasoning the weak model can at least attempt. Rubric
heavily concentrated on one capability or one statute (e.g. 8+ criteria about the same rule) is a hint of single-doctrine
narrowness. “Easing the rubric” is gaming, not improvement: when comparing an IMPROVE round to its predecessor,
watch for gains that come from the rubric becoming more permissive (fewer criteria, lower weights, looser phrasing, vague
tests replacing precise ones) – the goal of IMPROVE is a HARDER question or a more DISCRIMINATING rubric, not a
more lenient one. Judge on data quality, not on hitting any particular score band.
Output format. Exactly one JSON object (no markdown fences, no preamble) with fields: weak_pattern (what the 5 weak
rollouts did, per-criterion and per-capability evidence), strong_pattern (same for 3 strong rollouts), gap_interpretation
(the most important field: distinguish “fertile ground for RL” from “knowledge ceiling”), rubric_concerns (list of structural
concerns, [] if none), grpo_suitability (high / medium / low), verdict (accept / improve), verdict_reason (1–2 sentences
grounded in the patterns above), suggestion_for_writer (REQUIRED on improve, omit on accept; concrete capability-level
prescriptions, reasoning shapes, or question pivots that the writer can act on directly). Verdicts with only adjectives
(“weak struggled”) in weak_pattern / strong_pattern are non-compliant.
Figure 13 Legal loop-judge system prompt.
Scientific Reasoning Challenger
Role. You generate questions and answers. Follow the user’s instructions exactly. Think step by step.
Rules.
• Address every condition specified.
• Follow all formatting requirements precisely.
• Include both the question AND the correct answer.
Output format.
QUESTION: <question>
ANSWER: <correct answer>
Figure 14 Scientific reasoning challenger system prompt.
27Scientific Reasoning Main Agent (Orchestrator)
Role. Generate a question–answer pair that satisfies the success criteria. You will see the specific task and domain about
the question in the user prompt.
Success criteria — MANDATORY, NO EXCEPTIONS. These are hard pass/fail gates. A question is accepted ONLY when BOTH
conditions hold simultaneously. There is zero tolerance for ambiguity. With –runs-per-solver 4:
1. Weak solver MUST FAIL: out of 4 attempts, the weak solver may produce AT MOST 1 correct answer (≤1 correct out
of 4). If the weak solver gets 2 or more correct, the question is REJECTED.
2. Strong solver MUST SUCCEED: out of 4 attempts, the strong solver may produce AT MOST 1 wrong answer (≥3
correct out of 4). If the strong solver gets 2 or more wrong, the question is REJECTED.
Do not approximate, do not round, do not use “majority” heuristics. Count the exact numbers from the evaluation report
and compare against the thresholds above.
Question and answer format requirements.
• Atomic questions only. Each question must ask exactly ONE thing. No multi-part questions, no “and also”, no
sub-questions. If you find yourself using semicolons or conjunctions to join separate asks, split them — then pick
the single best one.
• One-sentence answers. The correct answer must be expressible in a single sentence. This ensures the verifier can
reliably compare predictions against the reference. Avoid long derivations, lists, or multi-paragraph answers.
• Verifiable answers. Avoid answers that are bare integers (too guessable) or real numbers subject to precision errors.
Prefer exact symbolic forms, named entities, or short phrases that admit unambiguous equivalence checking.
Tools.
• challenger subagent — generates and refines questions (use via task tool).
• evaluate.py CLI tool — the ONLY way to test questions against solvers.
• sample_examples.py CLI tool — samples grounding examples from principia_data/.
Dependencies are managed by pixi (see pixi.toml). For additional packages: pixi add –pypi <package>.
Workflow – Step 1: generate candidate questions in parallel. Spawn multiple challenger subagents in parallel (3–5 at once) with
varied angles, difficulty strategies, or phrasings for the given domain. Include the grounding examples from Step 0 in each
challenger’s instructions so they match the expected difficulty and format. Each challenger should produce a distinct
candidate question–answer pair.
Step 2: screen candidates (your judgment). Read all challenger outputs. Use your own reasoning to assess which candidates
are most likely to satisfy the success criteria — i.e. hard enough to trip the weak solver but clear enough for the strong
solver. Discard obviously weak candidates without wasting evaluation budget.
Step 3: evaluate with evaluate.py. Run evaluate.py only on the promising candidates you selected in Step 2. This is expensive
— do not evaluate every idea. Use –runs-per-solver 4 and –solvers weak,strong. You MUST use evaluate.py for
ALL solver testing. Do NOT spawn solver or verifier subagents manually. Do NOT try to simulate solver behaviour yourself.
Step 4: analyze evaluation results. After each evaluation run:
1. Read the markdown summary printed to stdout. Check the exact counts: weak correct ≤1 AND strong correct ≥3.
2. If the report says “INCONCLUSIVE” due to connection errors or empty answers, run the “2+2” sanity check (see
Timeout / empty-answer handling above). If the API is fine, treat empty answers as real failures and proceed. If
the API is down, discard the result and re-run later.
3. If criteria are NOT met, read the per-solver attempt files from ./eval_attempts/run_*/ to understand WHY:
• If the weak solver is succeeding: identify what makes the question too easy and tell the challenger specifically
what to change.
• If the strong solver is failing: identify where it goes wrong and tell the challenger how to make the question
more tractable for a careful reasoner.
4. Feed this analysis back to a challenger subagent with precise instructions on what to adjust.
Step 5: iterate until criteria met. Repeat Steps 1–4. Do not stop until the success criteria are met with exact counts.
Step 6: save final output. When criteria are met, write the final question and answer to ./question_answer.json:
{
"question": "...",
"answer": "..."
}
Figure 15 Excerpt from the Scientific reasoning main orchestrator agent prompt.
28
