kata カタ - kata カタ Skip to content kata カタ kata カタ Search kenn-io/kata kata カタ kenn-io/kata
Start Start
Overview Overview On this page
Two ways to supervise
Why kata
Quickstart
How it works
When to use kata
Next steps
Quickstart
Install
Changelog
Guide Guide
Concepts
Web UI
Workspaces and projects
Semantic search
Comparisons
Migrating from Beads
Reference Reference
CLI
Model Context Protocol
Configuration
Metadata
Agent output format
HTTP API schema
Workflows Workflows
Agent workflows
Sharing models
Operations Operations
Remote daemon
GitHub sync
Federation
Agent orchestration
Hosted mode
PostgreSQL
Backup and restore
Design Design
Design notes
Architecture
Data model and durability
Federation technical notes
Hosted mode technical notes
Semantic search technical notes
Development Development
Contributing
Packaging kata
Embedding kata in Go
PostgreSQL migrations
Deploying docs
On this page
Two ways to supervise
Why kata
Quickstart
How it works
When to use kata
Next steps
kata カタ ¶
The issue tracker built for coding agents and the humans steering them.
A local-first task ledger agents drive from the CLI and humans supervise in the terminal or browser.
Install macOS Linux Windows
brew install kata
curl -fsSL https://katatracker.com/install.sh | bash
powershell -ExecutionPolicy ByPass -c "irm https://katatracker.com/install.ps1 | iex"
Quickstart → All install options →
Two ways to supervise ¶
kata tui keeps triage in the terminal. kata ui opens the same ledger in a full browser workspace:
Both images are generated from disposable synthetic data by the docs screenshot workflow. See the Web UI guide for projects, collections, issue editing, relationships, recurrences, and configured-daemon switching.
Why kata ¶
Built for agents
Stable short refs, --json and --agent output, idempotent creates, a claim flow, semantic-aware search, and predictable failure modes agents can script against.
Made for humans too
kata tui and kata ui browse, triage, and supervise agent-written work over the same data. The daemon serves the browser app directly.
Local-first, repo-clean
One Go binary, no runtime dependencies. Issue state lives in SQLite under KATA_HOME ; your repo commits only a small, secret-free .kata.toml .
Auditable by design
Closing an issue is an explicit completion claim with a reason, message, evidence, and actor attribution, on top of editable comments and durable events.
Quickstart ¶
cd your-repo kata init # bind this workspace to a kata project kata create "fix login race" # prints a short id, e.g. abc4 kata list # see open work # close only when the work is verified kata close abc4 --done \ --message "Fixed the login race; tests pass." --commit <sha> kata tui # browse and triage interactively kata ui # open the browser application
kata create prints each issue's short id; use it in later commands. Working with coding agents? kata init --with-agents drops kata's operating contract into AGENTS.md / CLAUDE.md , and kata quickstart prints the full agent contract. See the Quickstart for the complete walkthrough.
How it works ¶
The kata CLI resolves a project from your workspace, .kata.toml , or --project , then talks to a local daemon, starting one automatically when needed. The daemon owns a SQLite database under KATA_HOME , applies mutations, and records an event stream that both the CLI/TUI and hooks read. Search is lexical by default and can opt into semantic search with a local or hosted OpenAI-compatible embeddings endpoint. Optional GitHub sync can mirror upstream GitHub issues into kata, and federation can replicate selected projects through a hub. Your repo commits only the small .kata.toml binding, so issue history stays out of code history. Private-network remote daemon modes are explicit: operators can use bearer auth on trusted private HTTP or opt a single-user private IP into tokenless writes. See Concepts and Architecture for the full model.
Go applications can also run kata in-process through the listener-free go.kenn.io/kata service. The host application mounts the same HTTP API and owns the listener, authentication boundary, and process lifecycle; see Embedding kata in Go .
When to use kata ¶
Reach for kata when work should stay close to the machine doing it:
coding agents need to discover, claim, update, and close work from the CLI;
you want an instant terminal loop instead of a browser session;
work spans local clones, worktrees, experiments, or non-git directories;
task state should survive chat compaction without becoming a markdown plan;
closes should carry evidence and an audit trail.
kata is not a SaaS issue tracker. Linear, Jira, GitHub Issues, and ClickUp are shared online systems for roadmaps, dashboards, and cross-team reporting; kata is a local ledger for the work itself. They coexist. See Comparisons for the trade-offs.
Next steps ¶
Concepts . The data model and how the pieces fit.
Web UI . Manage projects and issues in the browser.
CLI reference . Every command and flag.
Model Context Protocol . Connect an MCP agent to one bound Kata project.
Semantic search . Improve issue discovery with opt-in embeddings.
GitHub sync . Bring GitHub issues into kata.
Agent workflows . The operating contract for agents.
Comparisons . kata vs. SaaS issue trackers.
Copyright © 2026 Kenn Software LLC Made with Zensical
