\.
IEPRIN'.J'EnFROM
ADVANCESIN COMPUTERS , VOLUME6
IP 1965
ACADEMICPRESSINC., NEW YORK
Speculations Concerning the First
Ultraintelligent Machine*
IRVING JOHN GOOD
Trinity College, Oxford, England and
Atlas Computer Laboratory, Chilton, Berkshire, England
1. Introduction. 31
2. Ultra.intelligent Me.chines and Their Value 33
3. Communication a.aRegeneration 37
4. Some Representations of "Meaning" and Their Relevance to Intelligent
Me.chines 40
5: Recall and Information Retrieval 43
6. Cell Assemblies and Subassemblies 54
7. An Assembly Theory of Meaning 74
8. The Economy of Meaning 77
9. Conclusions . 78
10. Appendix: Informe.tione.l and Causal Intere.ctions 80
References 83
1. Introduction
The survival of man depends on the early construction of an ultra-
intelligent machine.
In order to design an ultraintelligent machine we need to understand
more about the human brain or human thought or both. In the follow-
ing pages an attempt is made to take more of the magic out of the brain
by means of a "subassembly" theory, which is a modification of Hebb's
famous speculative cell-assembly theory. My belief is that the first
ultraintelligent machine is most likely to incorporate vast artificial
n~_ ural circuitry, and that its behavior will be partly explicable in terms
of the subassembly theory. Later machines will all be designed by ultra-
• Based on talks giv~!]dn ,~-~~El ~ np~on the Conceptual Aspects of Biocommunica-
tions, Neuropsychiatric lnstitu fe, lmiv lirsity' 'of California , Los Angeles , October 1962;
and in the Artificial Intelligence Sessions of the Winter General Meetings of the IEEE,
January 1963 [I, 46].
The first draft of this monograph was completed in April 1963, and the present
slightly amended version in May 1964.
I am much indebted to Mrs. Euthie Anthony of IDA for the arduous task of typing.
31IRVING JOHN GOOD
intelligent machines, and who am I to guess what principles they will
devise? But probably Man will construct the deWJex machina in his own
image.
The subassembly theory sheds light on the physical embodiment of
memory and meaning, and there can be little doubt that both will need
embodiment in an ultraintelligent machine. Even for the brain, we shall
argue that physical embodiment of meaning must have originated for
reasons of economy, at least if the metaphysical reasons can be ignored.
Economy is important in any engineering venture, but especially so
when the price is exceedingly high, as it most likely will be for the first
ultraintelligent machine. Hence semantics is relevant to the design of
such a machine. Yet a detailed knowledge of semantics might not be
required, since the artificial neural network will largely take care of it,
provided that the parameters a.re correctly chosen, and provided that
the network is adequately integrated with its sensorium and motorium
(input and output). For, if these conditions a.remet, the ma.chine will be
able to learn from experience, by means of positive and negative re-
inforcement, and the instruction of the machine will resemble that of a
child. Hence it will be useful if the instructor knows something a.bout
semantics, but not necessarily more useful than for the instructor of a
child. The correct choice of the parameters, and even of the design
philosophy, will depend on the usual scientific method of successive
approximation, using speculation, theory, and experiment. The
percentage of speculation needs to be highest in the early stages of any
endeavor. Therefore no apology is offered for the speculative nature of
the present work. For we a.re certainly still in the early stages in the
design of n.nultra.intelligent machine.
In order that the arguments should be reasonably self-contained,it is
necessary to discuss a variety of topics. We shall define an ultra.-
intelligent ma.chine, and, since its cost will be very large, briefly con-
sider its potential value. We say something a.bout the physical embodi-
ment of a word or statement, and defend the idea that the function of
meaning is economy by describing it as a process of "regeneration." In
order to explain what this means, we devote a few pages to the nature of
communication. (The brain is of course a complex communication and
control system.) We shall need to discuss the process of recall, partly
because its understanding is very closely related to the understanding of
understanding. The process of recall in its turn is a special case of
statistical information retrieval. This subject will be discussed in
Section 5. One of the main difficulties in this subject is how to estimate
the probabilities .of events that have never occurred. That such
probabilities are relevant to intelligence is to be expected, since intelli-
gence js sometimes defined as the ability to adapt to new circumstances.
32THE FIRST ULTRAINTELLIGENT MACHINE
The difficulty of estimating probabilities is sometimes overlooked in the
literature of artificial intelligence, but this article would be too long if
the subject were surveyed here. A separate monograph has been written
on this subject [48].
Some of the ideas of Section 5 are adapted, in Section 6, to the prob-
lem of recall, which is discussed and to some extent explained in terms
of the subassembly theory.
The paper concludes with some brief suggestions concerning the
physical representation of "meaning."
This paper will, as we said, be speculative: no blueprint will be
suggested for the construction of an ultraintelligent machine, and there
will be no reference to transisitors, diodes, and cryogenics. (Note,
however, that cryogenics have the important merit of low power
consumption. This feature will be valuable in an ultraintelligent
machine.) One of our aims is to pinpoint some of the difficulties. The
machine will not be on the drawing board until many people have talked
big, and others have built small, conceivably using deoxyribonucleic
acid (DNA).
Throughout the paper there are suggestions for new research. Some
further summarizing remarks are to be found in the Conclusions.
2. Ultraintelligent Machines and Their Value
Let an ultraintelligent machine be defined as a.machine that can far
surpass all the intellectual activities of any man however clever. Since
the design of machines is one of these intellectual activities, an ultra-
intelligent machine could design even better machines; there would
then unquestionably be an "intelligence explosion," and the intelli-
gence of man would be left fa.r behind (see for example refs. [22], [34],
[44]). Thus the first ultraintelligent machine is the last invention that
man need ever make, provided that the machine is docile enough to tell
us how to keep it under control. It is curious that this point is made so
seldom outside of science fiction. It is sometimes worthwhile to take
science fiction seriously.
In one science fiction story a machine refused to design a better one
since it did not wish to be put out of a job. This would not be an in-
superable difficulty, even if machines can be egotistical, since the
machine could gradually improve itself out of all recognition, by acquir-
ing new equipment.
B. V. Bowden stated on British television (August 1962) that there is
no point in building a ma.chine with the intelligence of a man, since it is
easier to construct human brains by the usual method. A similar point
was made by a speaker during the meetings reported in a recent IEEE
~ 33