July 2016 | Volume 3 | Article 40 1
Original Research
published: 12 July 2016
doi: 10.3389/frobt.2016.00040
Frontiers in Robotics and AI | www.frontiersin.org
Edited by:
John Howard Long,
Vassar College, USA
Reviewed by:
Andrés Faíña Rodríguez-Vila,
IT University of Copenhagen,
Denmark
Leonardo Trujillo,
Tijuana Institute of Technology,
Mexico
*Correspondence:
Kenneth O. Stanley
kstanley@cs.ucf.edu
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Evolutionary Robotics,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Robotics and AI
Received: 31 March 2016
Accepted: 23 June 2016
Published: 12 July 2016
Citation:
Pugh JK, Soros LB and Stanley KO
(2016) Quality Diversity: A New
Frontier for Evolutionary
Computation.
Front. Robot. AI 3:40.
doi: 10.3389/frobt.2016.00040
Quality Diversity: a new Frontier for
evolutionary computation
Justin K. Pugh, Lisa B. Soros and Kenneth O. Stanley*
Evolutionary Complexity Research Group, Department of Computer Science, University of Central Florida, Orlando, FL, USA
While evolutionary computation and evolutionary robotics take inspiration from nature,
they have long focused mainly on problems of performance optimization. Yet, evolution
in nature can be interpreted as more nuanced than a process of simple optimization. In
particular, natural evolution is a divergent search that optimizes locally within each niche
as it simultaneously diversifies. This tendency to discover both quality and diversity at the
same time differs from many of the conventional algorithms of machine learning, and also
thereby suggests a different foundation for inferring the approach of greatest potential
for evolutionary algorithms. In fact, several recent evolutionary algorithms called quality
diversity (QD) algorithms (e.g., novelty search with local competition and MAP-Elites)
have drawn inspiration from this more nuanced view, aiming to fill a space of possibilities
with the best possible example of each type of achievable behavior. The result is a new
class of algorithms that return an archive of diverse, high-quality behaviors in a single
run. The aim in this paper is to study the application of QD algorithms in challenging
environments (in particular complex mazes) to establish their best practices for ambitious
domains in the future. In addition to providing insight into cases when QD succeeds and
fails, a new approach is investigated that hybridizes multiple views of behaviors (called
behavior characterizations) in the same run, which succeeds in overcoming some of the
challenges associated with searching for QD with respect to a behavior characterization
that is not necessarily sufficient for generating both quality and diversity at the same time.
Keywords: novelty search, non-objective search, quality diversity, behavioral diversity, evolutionary computation,
neuroevolution
1. INTRODUCTION
Theproductsofnaturehavelongservedasinspirationfortheinvestigationandpracticeofevolution-
ary algorithms and evolutionary robotics (Cliff et al., 1993; Nolfi and Floreano, 2000; Stanley, 2011).
Yet the ability of such algorithms to match the complexity and sophistication of nature has frustrat-
ingly lagged, as researchers in the fields often observe (Stanley and Miikkulainen, 2003; Doncieux
et al., 2015). This observation then often becomes the motivation for developing more sophisticated
algorithmsandencodings.Yet,evenmorefundamentalthanthequestionofhowtoabstractthemost
brilliant achievements of nature into an algorithm of commensurate power is a question less often
explicitly asked: for what practical purpose is evolution actually suited anyway?
Until recently, throughout a large swath of the field, the implicit yet resounding answer to this
questionhasbeenobjectiveoptimization(Mitchell,1997;DeJong,2002;Bishop,2006).Variousearly
pioneers in evolutionary computation independently inferred from their observations of nature
that evolution can serve when abstracted artificially as a powerful optimization algorithm (Fogel
et al., 1966; Holland, 1975; Goldberg and Richardson, 1987; Goldberg, 1989; Schwefel, 1993). The2
Pugh et al. Quality Diversity: A New Frontier
Frontiers in Robotics and AI | www.frontiersin.org July 2016 | Volume 3 | Article 40
discoveries of evolution in nature, such as the flight of birds or
the intelligence of the human brain, suggested to these pioneers
that if fitness pressure is calibrated to push selection toward an
ambitious objective then evolution can become a tool of directed
design and creation.
Thecastingofevolutionasanalgorithmforoptimizationnatu-
rally pitted evolutionary computation against the many subfields
ofmachinelearninginvestedinoptimization,leadingtoconflicts
andcritiques,sometimesportrayingevolutionarycomputationas
ad hoc, unprincipled, less effective than other more theoretically
based optimization methods, or even outdated (and therefore
often given less room in modern texts on machine learning)
(Bäck et al., 1997; Bishop, 2006). While sometimes overly harsh
oruninformed,evenifsuchcritiquesareaccepted,theperplexing
question still hangs in the background of how it is possible that
evolution in nature has managed to produce artifacts far beyond
the capacity of any subfield of machine learning or optimization.
If evolution is apparently so unmatched in power in nature, then
why is there even a debate about its ability to compete with other
approaches to optimization?
While one possible answer is that we have yet to uncover the
deepest principles that unlock its true potential as an objective
optimizer, a more intriguing possibility is that the real virtue of
evolution is not in the end optimization at all. This suggestion
goes beyond Herb Simon’s assertion that evolution is a satisficer
rather than an optimizer (Simon, 1957), which casts evolution
almost as a poor man’s optimizer. Rather, the hypothesis is that
evolution is indeed phenomenally virtuosic at something, but
that something is simply not optimization. This perspective can
help to explain how it could be possible for evolution to produce
sensational results in nature yet frustratingly modest ones in
computation: we may be using it wrong. Perhaps the analogy with
optimization was a mistake.
Indeed, it is difficult to imagine that evolution in nature
is structured in the same way as a conventional optimization
algorithm: there is no obvious unifying objective and organisms
are often rewarded for being different in addition to being bet-
ter. For example, organisms that are sufficiently different from
their predecessors may establish a new niche in which they enjoy
greatly reduced competition and thus are more likely to survive
(Kirschner and Gerhart, 1998; Lehman and Stanley, 2013).
Contrary to the tendency of optimization algorithms to converge
over time to a single “best” solution, natural evolution instead
exhibits a remarkable tendency toward divergence – continually
accumulating myriad different ways of being. This observation is
thecruxofanalternativeperspectiveinevolutionarycomputation
(EC) that has been gaining momentum in recent years: evolution
as a machine for diversification rather than optimization.
Inspired by this alternate view of natural evolution’s apparent
strength as a diversifier, a new evolutionary algorithm called
novelty search (NS) (Lehman and Stanley, 2008, 2011a) was
introduced, which searches only for behavioral diversity without
any underlying objective pressure. Surprisingly, in some domains
(particularlythosethataredeceptive),NSquicklyfindstheglobal
optimumevenwhenobjective-basedapproachesconsistentlyfail.
The counterintuitive result that NS can sometimes find the best
solutions without explicitly searching for them has since sparked
considerable research interest in applying NS and methods like
it to solving problems that were previously considered to be too
difficult (Lehman and Stanley, 2008, 2010, 2011a,b; Kistemaker
and Whiteson, 2011; Mouret, 2011; Risi et al., 2011; Mouret and
Doncieux,2012;CullyandMouret,2013;GomesandChristensen,
2013; Gomes et al., 2013; Liapis et al., 2013b; Martinez et al.,
2013; Naredo and Trujillo, 2013). Novelty search has effectively
demonstratedthatevolution’stalentfordiversificationcanitselfbe
harnessed as a powerful tool for seeking a near-optimum, instead
oftheconventionalnotionof“survivalofthefittest.”However,this
viewignorestheintrinsicvalueofdiversityitself,treatingitmerely
as a “means to an end” of finding the global optimum as usual.
In a true departure from conventional optimization, which
seeks only the single best-performing solution, a new search
paradigmhasbeguntoemergewithinECwheretheeffortfocuses
instead on finding various viable solutions, similar to how evolu-
tion in nature has discovered over billions of years a vast assort-
mentofuniquespecies,eachofwhicharecapableoforchestrating
the complex system of biological processes necessary to sustain
life. More precisely, the goal of this new type of search, called
quality diversity (QD), is to find a maximally diverse collection
of individuals (with respect to a space of possible behaviors) in
which each member is as high performing as possible. In service
of this goal, QD algorithms, such as novelty search, with local
competition (NSLC) (Lehman and Stanley, 2011b) and MAP-
Elites (Mouret and Clune, 2015) carefully balance a drive toward
increasing diversity with localized searches for quality in an
analogywithnaturewherespeciesfacethestrongestcompetition
fromwithintheirownniche.Inthisway,searchcanmovetoward
different behaviors, while simultaneously improving behaviors
that have already been discovered.
An important aspect of QD that differentiates it from other
approaches designed to return multiple results is that in QD,
diversity between individuals is measured with respect to their
behavior (the actions and features of an individual over the
course of its lifetime). The experimenter selects some subset of
behavioral features of interest to form a behavior characterization
(BC), thus defining a space of possible behaviors. The assump-
tion in QD is that all parts of the behavior space are considered
equally important. This assumption contrasts with non-QD
approaches that assign priority to higher-performing regions,
which draw inspiration from the idea of returning multiple local
optima (Mahfoud, 1995; Trujillo et al., 2008, 2011). Instead, the
goal of QD is to sample all regions of the behavior space (at some
granularity),returningthebestpossibleperformancewithineach
region. In other words, diversity takes priority over quality1
and
therefore QD algorithms must be careful to avoid driving search
away from lower-performing regions. More formally, the behav-
ior space must be divided into t niches {N1, …, Nt} that together
cover the entire space. That is, every point in the behavior space
belongs to some niche Ni. Then, the task of QD is to maximize a
quality measure Q within every niche.2
1
Approaches that desire to return a handful of the best local optima (i.e., where
quality takes priority over diversity) may be better served by the term diverse
quality.
2
For any niche Ni where no point has been discovered, Qi is defined as 0.3
Pugh et al. Quality Diversity: A New Frontier
Frontiers in Robotics and AI | www.frontiersin.org July 2016 | Volume 3 | Article 40
Although QD algorithms can be applied to traditional opti-
mization-oriented tasks where they may even perform well due
to their ability to overcome the problem of deception, the deeper
promiseofQDistopushbeyondwhatispossiblethroughsimple
optimization. In particular, QD has potential applications in the
areas of computational creativity (Boden, 2006) and open-ended
evolution (Standish, 2003; Bedau, 2008), where the hope is to
automatically generate an endless procession of uniquely inter-
esting artifacts. In more restricted search spaces, QD algorithms
have also been called “illumination algorithms” because they
effectivelyrevealthebestpossibleperformanceachievableineach
region of the phenotype space (Mouret and Clune, 2015). The
types of problems inspired by QD (many of which are discussed
in the next section) favor approaches that explore many promis-
ingdirectionsatthesametimeandthusrepresentanopportunity
for evolutionary algorithms to establish a more unique profile
within the broader machine learning community where focused
single-solution approaches such as backpropagation (Rumelhart
et al., 1986) and support vector machines (Cortes and Vapnik,
1995) have historically dominated.
To help accelerate research in this emerging area, the aim of
thispaperistoestablishastandardframeworkforunderstanding
and comparing different approaches to searching for QD. [This
paper is in effect a major expansion on the theme of our earlier
conference paper that first introduced the term quality diversity
(Pughetal.,2015).]Thehopeistounifyearlyworksinthisemerg-
ingfieldandtopromotethedesignofbetterQDalgorithmsinthe
future.Tothatend,thispaperintroducesabenchmarkdomainin
the form of a series of maze-navigation tasks of varying difficulty
that are paired with a quantifiable measure of the performance of
QDalgorithmscalledtheQD-score.Experimentalresultsinthese
mazes comparing current state-of-the-art approaches as well as
several novel variants thereof reveal important insights into the
application of QD algorithms that extend beyond individual
methods.
One such insight concerns the importance of considering
how diversity is characterized when applying QD algorithms.
Specifically, some choices of characterization can make finding
QD more difficult, which on sufficiently deceptive problems can
translateintoaninabilitytofindthebestsolutionsaltogether.This
apparent weakness presents a problem for researchers interested
in finding QD with respect to a non-optimal characterization
(i.e., one which inhibits finding the best-performing individuals)
because standard practice suggests driving search with the same
notion of diversity that you are ultimately interested in discov-
ering (Trujillo et al., 2008, 2011; Lehman and Stanley, 2011b;
Cully and Mouret, 2013; Szerlip and Stanley, 2013; Mouret and
Clune, 2015). A solution to this problem is presented and then
empirically validated in the form of new QD algorithms that
drive search with multiple characterizations simultaneously.
These new multi-characterization approaches, together with an
increasedunderstandingofthetypesofcharacterizationsthatare
ideal for driving search effectively, enable the application of QD
algorithms to various more difficult domains in the future.
Naturehasdiscoveredorganismsbothdiverseandhighlyopti-
mized within their own niches. This kind of divergent creative
phenomenondiffersfromthetypicalconvergentobjective-driven
processseeninsearchalgorithmsacrossmachinelearning,evolu-
tionary computation (EC), and evolutionary robotics. By bring-
ingQDnowtotheforefrontofECandprovidingaframeworkfor
understanding and comparing its available algorithms, the hope
is that the field can progress more confidently from this initial
foundation. In some cases (as later results will show), QD may
even produce results beyond what an objective-driven process
canaccomplish,butitmorebroadlyoffersthechancetouncovera
largeswathofuniquelyintriguingpossibilitieswithinavastspace
and during just a single run.
2. BACKGROUND
This section begins with a review of historical precedent for the
study of QD, followed by highlights of recent works in the area
and the questions they raise.
2.1. Before QD
Early work in multi-modal function optimization [MMFO;
Mahfoud (1995)] foreshadowed the later arrival of QD. The aim
of MMFO is to discover multiple local optima within a search
space,whichnaturallyyieldsadiversityofsolutions.However,its
main difference from QD is that MMFO traditionally focuses on
genetic diversity and tends to apply only to simple phenotypes,
such as mathematical functions, where the genotype and pheno-
type are in effect the same (Mahfoud, 1995); QD reflects a later
shift in interest toward behavioral diversity and is often applied
in domains such as evolutionary robotics where the relationship
betweengenomeandbehavioriscomplex.Themainlimitationof
genetic diversity is that it is susceptible to genetic aliasing, which
means that genomes that are different may nevertheless behave
similarly. Such aliasing, which is amplified especially in the pres-
ence of indirect genotype to phenotype mappings (Hornby and
Pollack, 2001, 2002; Bongard, 2002; Stanley and Miikkulainen,
2003; Stanley, 2007), is thus counterproductive to find various
behaviors, as shown empirically by Trujillo et al. (2011).
Another subject of research related to QD is multi-objective
optimization (MOO) (Deb et al., 2002). In MOO, the search
algorithm aims to uncover the key trade-offs (called the Pareto
front) among two or more objectives set by the user. Similar to
QD,MOOreturnsasetoftopcandidatesratherthanasinglewin-
ner, but MOO is still ultimately driven toward specific objectives
(though more than one) and therefore intrinsically convergent.
By contrast, QD is a genuine divergent form of search driven
explicitly to move away in the search space from where it has
visitedbefore.Theuniqueeffectisthustorevealasamplingofthe
spectrum of possible behaviors latent in a search space.
2.2. Early Divergent Search Algorithms
Interest in divergence in evolutionary algorithms was sparked
initially by the surprising observation that some problems are
solved more reliably by searching for novel behaviors than by
searching for their objective (Lehman and Stanley, 2008, 2011a).
This approach, called novelty search, revealed just how pervasive
andcostlydeceptioncanbeinotherwiseunremarkabledomains.
It also showed that searching divergently instead of convergently
can sometimes sidestep deception to uncover desirable parts of4
Pugh et al. Quality Diversity: A New Frontier
Frontiers in Robotics and AI | www.frontiersin.org July 2016 | Volume 3 | Article 40
the search space. The benefits of divergent search were further
confirmedthroughsimilarexperimentsbyMouretandDoncieux
(2009) and Mouret and Doncieux (2012), who use the synony-
mous term behavioral diversity.
These initial studies were followed by a wave of interest
in divergent search algorithms as researchers explored their
potential for discovery and open-endedness (Risi et al., 2009,
2011; Soltoggio and Jones, 2009; Doucette and Heywood, 2010;
Goldsby and Cheng, 2010; Graening et al., 2010; Krcah, 2010;
Kistemaker and Whiteson, 2011; Woolley and Stanley, 2011;
Gomes and Christensen, 2013; Gomes et al., 2013; Liapis et al.,
2013a,b; Martinez et al., 2013; Morse et al., 2013; Naredo and
Trujillo, 2013; Risi and Stanley, 2013). However, a clear missing
ingredient from pure novelty or behavioral diversity techniques
is a complementary notion of objective quality. The radical shift
away from objectives toward divergence discards with it the
ability to specify up front what is good and what is bad, and to
have that notion influence the search. The loss of this convenient
notion set the stage for its reemergence in QD algorithms.
2.3. Quality Diversity (QD) Algorithms
Earlyworksonbehavioraldiversity(MouretandDoncieux,2009,
2012) and some more recent studies of combining novelty with
objectives (Gomes et al., 2015) investigate the idea of hybridizing
novelty with fitness. The means of such combination is usually
through a multi-objective framework (Mouret and Doncieux,
2009, 2012), though a weighted combination is also possible
(Gomes et al., 2015). However, in either case the notion of fitness
(i.e., quality) is global, which means in effect that the component
of the search pushing toward quality focuses its effort exclusively
on the part of the search space where performance is dominant
over all other areas of the search space. Thus, such approaches
are not generally focused on QD. In an approach closer to QD,
Trujillo et al. (2008, 2011) achieve multiple functional behaviors
through behavioral speciation and fitness sharing. However,
while this approach finds several locally optimal behaviors, it is
still governed by global fitness because it preferentially explores
higher-performing niches. A preferential push toward global
quality in any approach reintroduces a strong convergent force
into the search. While that may help in some cases if the aim is
to discover a single near-global optimum or a handful of high-
performing local optima, QD algorithms aim instead to explore
the entire behavior space.
In particular, the hope in QD is to uncover as many diverse
behavioralnichesaspossible,butwhereeachnicheisrepresented
by a candidate of the highest possible quality for that niche. That
way,theresultisakindofilluminationofthebestofallthediverse
possibilitiesthatexist(MouretandClune,2015).TheoriginalQD
algorithmofthistype,callednoveltysearchwithlocalcompetition
(NSLC), hybridizes novelty search with local fitness competi-
tions only among individuals with similar behaviors, yielding a
broad population of numerous simultaneous local competitions
in diverse behavioral niches (Lehman and Stanley, 2011b). In its
first demonstration, NSLC uncovered a collection of effective
virtual creature morphologies and walking strategies in a single
run, thereby demonstrating the unique benefits of QD (Lehman
and Stanley, 2011b).
The potential to uncover a diverse collection of high-quality
alternatives in a single run inspired further investigations and
algorithms. For example, Szerlip and Stanley (2013) evolve
diverse ambulating two-dimensional creatures made of sticks,
also in a single run. Cully and Mouret (2013) evolve a collec-
tion of walking behaviors for hexapod robots that functions as a
repertoire of skills for a robot. In a hint at the wide applicability
of QD, Szerlip et al. (2015) evolve diverse low-level feature detec-
torsforneuralnetworksthatarelateraggregatedintoacombined
classifier network. Revealing that QD encompasses more than a
singlealgorithm,MouretandClune(2015)andCullyetal.(2015)
introduce an alternate QD algorithm called multi-dimensional
archive of phenotypic elites (MAP-Elites) that collects elite ver-
sions of diverse behavior within individual bins in a behavioral
map. In yet another QD application, MAP-Elites collects diverse
walking strategies for a robot that can be adapted in response to
different kinds of damage (Cully et al., 2015). Other applications
of MAP-Elites include generating sets of images for fooling deep
networks (Nguyen et al., 2015a), and for exposing the space of
concepts encoded inside a deep network as two-dimensional
images (Nguyen et al., 2015b) and as three-dimensional models
(Lehman et al., 2016).
ThequicklyexpandingsetofapplicationsofQDmotivatesthe
need for a systematic study of its best practices, which is the aim
inthispaper.Forthatpurpose,akeyconceptinanyQDalgorithm
is the behavior characterization (BC). The BC is usually a vector
that describes the chronology of actions taken by an individual
during its evaluation but can also describe other salient aspects
of an individual’s behavior or phenotype. This vector is then used
to compute its novelty compared with other individuals (or its
location in the behavior map in MAP-Elites), thereby driving
the diversity component of QD. An important property of the
BC is its alignment with the notion of quality, which refers to the
degree to which finding novelty tends also to lead to higher fitness.
For example, in a maze, if the BC is based on the final position
reached,thenitishighlyalignedbecauseeventuallyanagentthat
continues to find new final positions will find the endpoint of the
maze. While BC alignment can be difficult to measure a priori
(just as the shape of fitness landscapes are not known a priori for
any challenging problems of interest), a BC’s degree of alignment
can be anticipated by considering two key properties of highly
aligned BCs: (1) each behavior is associated with only a narrow
range of fitness values (e.g., a robot’s final position in a maze is
associated with exactly one fitness value) and (2) the maximum
possible fitness in adjacent regions of behavior space correlates
(e.g., nearby positions in a maze generally have similar fitness).
By contrast, interestingly, most published QD applications
involve finding diversity with respect to an unaligned BC because
usuallythenotionofdiversitythatwefindinterestingisnotintrin-
sically aligned with quality (Lehman and Stanley, 2011b; Cully
and Mouret, 2013; Szerlip and Stanley, 2013; Mouret and Clune,
2015).Forexample,seekingcreaturesofdifferentmorphologiesor
with different numbers of legs does not naturally lead to higher-
quality walking, yet we are nevertheless interested in finding
such creatures. So far, QD has succeeded even despite a lack of
such alignment, leaning heavily on the quality component of the
algorithmtopushotherwiseunalignednotionsofdiversitytowardFIGURE 1 | Small maze. Individuals start at the yellow circle (top) and must
navigate to the goal point, marked with a blue circle (bottom). The relative
openness and lenient time constraint allow a range of different techniques for
reaching the goal.
5
Pugh et al. Quality Diversity: A New Frontier
Frontiers in Robotics and AI | www.frontiersin.org July 2016 | Volume 3 | Article 40
good performance. For example, a previous study of QD that is
precedent for the present paper finds that unaligned BCs often
leadtoaslowerdiscoveryofpassablesolutions(Pughetal.,2015).
The key question raised by this previous study is whether QD
algorithms with unaligned BCs ultimately stop working entirely
when the domain is sufficiently hard. The maze used to test una-
ligned BCs in Pugh et al. (2015) is relatively simple and easy to
solve; what would happen with much more complex mazes? This
paper takes this next step with mazes of a scale beyond mazes in
previous studies of QD and examines the effect on finding QD
with respect to unaligned BCs in these new mazes. Not only does
this study reveal how QD holds up in more complex domains
but it also surveys new strategies for mitigating the effects of BC
misalignment (which is usually the most desirable and intuitive
way to setup QD). Such insight is not only critical to the future of
QD as a nascent field but also important for the general progress
of machine learning outside of conventional convergent closed
problems, where the potential might be open-ended and the aim
to collect broad possibilities rather than to converge to a final
answer.
3. DOMAINS
In the experiments described in this paper, simulated wheeled
robots navigate mazes of varying complexity. To aid in their
navigation,theyareequippedwithsixrangefindersensors(fiveof
whichareevenlydistributedacrossthefronthalfoftherobot,and
one pointing backwards) and four pie-slice sensors that indicate
boththe relative direction and distance to the goal. Thesesensors
serve as inputs to an evolved neural controller with only a single
continuous output that controls the degree to which the robot
turns left or right (the robot always moves forward at a constant
speed). The task is to evolve neural controllers that successfully
guide the robot to a goal at the end of the maze.
Successfully navigating a maze can be challenging because it
requires learning a complex mapping between sensors and effec-
tors. In part, because sources of deception (and thus difficulty)
are often visually apparent (e.g., dead ends), maze navigation has
become a canonical domain for evolutionary robotics experi-
ments [e.g., Lehman and Stanley (2011a) and Velez and Clune
(2014)]. Another benefit of maze domains is that they tend to
becomputationallyinexpensive,allowingmanymoreevaluations
than more intensive physics-based simulations. For this reason,
maze domains are ideal for studying evolutionary dynamics over
longtimescales–anendeavorthatwouldbeimpossibleinamore
computationally expensive domain.
In this study, three mazes of varying difficulty assess the effi-
cacy of QD algorithms that will be described in the next section.
In an important departure from mazes designed as an optimiza-
tionproblem[e.g.,theHardMazedomaininLehmanandStanley
(2011a)], where there is often only a single “correct” path, the
mazes here are intentionally designed with multiple viable paths
to reach the goal. This unusual maze design makes it possible
to investigate evolution’s potential for finding QD. Thus, the task
in this study is not simply to find an agent that reaches the goal,
but to find all of the different ways of driving through the maze
(including those who do not necessarily reach the goal at all).
An important feature of all three mazes is the deceptive
trap – areas of the maze that appear to be close to the goal (in
terms of Euclidean distance) but, because of the presence of
obstructions, do not actually offer a short drivable path to the
goal.Thesetraps,oftenintheformofaneasilyaccessiblecorridor
that terminates at a dead end before reaching the goal, represent
local optima in the search space, and serve to deceive algorithms
that simply follow a gradient of increasing fitness (Lehman and
Stanley, 2011a). Thus, mazes containing such traps serve as a
metaphor for complex domains in general, where successfully
finding solutions requires a clever search algorithm aimed at
innovation rather than straightforward optimization.
The first maze, introduced by Pugh et al. (2015) as the
“QD-maze” but called the small maze (Figure 1) in this article,
provides an initial example of this multi-path maze design. In
this maze, individuals must escape from a single deceptive trap
surroundingthestartpointafterwhichthemazeopensup,allow-
ing various possible strategies for reaching the goal. Importantly,
agents are given a considerable amount of time to allow for the
expression of complicated and roundabout strategies (such as
crossing back and forth across the map several times before driv-
ing to the goal). The ideal QD algorithm would eventually find
allstrategiesfordrivingaroundthemaze,includingthosethatdo
not end up reaching the goal.
Of course, the most interesting real-world problems are often
complex and challenging, and if maze navigation domains are to
serve as proxies for such problems then they too should display
non-trivial complexity. For this reason, two additional gauntlet
mazes are introduced. While each maintains the important
design principle of multiple viable paths to the goal, these mazes
are intentionally made more difficult by (1) adding several larger
andmorepronounceddeceptivetraps,(2)settingstrictmaximumTABLE 1 | Maze-specific parameters.
Small maze Asymmetrical
gauntlet
Symmetrical
gauntlet
Evaluation time (ticks) 800 1300 2700
Maze dimensions (units) 900 × 770 6000 × 6000 4600 × 5280
Rangefinder length (units) 100 200 200
Velocity (units/tick) 6 6 6
Max turn rate (rads/tick) 0.21 0.21 0.21
Reflecting differences in design and difficulty, some parameters vary between mazes.
FIGURE 3 | Symmetric gauntlet. Individuals start at the point at the bottom
and must navigate to the goal at the top of the maze. Each leg of the maze is
an approximate mirror image of the neighboring legs (thus, all paths through
the maze are similarly difficult to achieve). The presence of multiple legs
allows various different driving strategies to be successful.
FIGURE 2 | Asymmetric gauntlet. Individuals start at the bottom point and
must navigate to the goal at the top of the maze. Because of the variation
between maze legs, reaching the goal is easier by some routes than others.
The presence of multiple paths through the maze increases the various
potential driving strategies that can reach the goal.
6
Pugh et al. Quality Diversity: A New Frontier
Frontiers in Robotics and AI | www.frontiersin.org July 2016 | Volume 3 | Article 40
evaluation times such that individuals cannot wander down a
deceptivetrapandthensubsequentlyreachthegoalpoint,and(3)
placing the goal point at the end of a series of chained sub-mazes
that are each approximately as hard as the small maze and the
originalHardMazefromLehmanandStanley(2011a).Navigating
totheendoftheasymmetricgauntlet(Figure2)andsymmetric
gauntlet (Figure 3) thus requires evolving complicated behavio-
ral strategies and overcoming significant levels of deception. In
this way, these mazes test both the ability to overcome multiple
successive deceptive traps and cover the space of possible solu-
tions in the same run. Parameter settings for each maze domain
arepresentedinTable1,whichdescribesdifferencesinmazesize,
time constraints, and agent sensor radius.
4. ALGORITHMS
This section describes each of the various algorithms considered
in this study, beginning with those featured by Pugh et al. (2015).
Because the pursuit of quality diversity has only recently become
a subject of persistent research interest, there are only two main
QD algorithms currently represented in the literature: NSLC
(Lehman and Stanley, 2011b) and MAP-Elites (Cully et al., 2015;
Mouret and Clune, 2015). To provide a broader perspective on
the untapped algorithmic potential in this developing field, this
study additionally features several novel variants of these core
algorithms including some proposed improvements to MAP-
Elites, which is mechanically very simple and thus particularly
amenabletomodification.Importantly,severalothernewvariants
specifically serve to address the problem of finding QD when the
desired notion of diversity is unaligned with quality (and thus
potentially incapable of finding the best solutions).
All of the following algorithm descriptions are partial in that
theydescribeonlyselectionandpopulationmaintenancemechan-
ics for an underlying evolutionary algorithm. Algorithms new to
this paper or otherwise not well represented in the literature are
described with pseudocode in Appendix A. With the exception
of Fitness (Section 4.1.1), which is implemented generationally
(the entire population is replaced on every tick), all other algo-
rithms are implemented as steady state (only a small portion of
the population is replaced at a time). In particular, batches of 32
genomes are evaluated at a time to facilitate a modest amount of
parallelism without substantially disrupting the composition of
the population between batches.7
Pugh et al. Quality Diversity: A New Frontier
Frontiers in Robotics and AI | www.frontiersin.org July 2016 | Volume 3 | Article 40
4.1. Controls
While not themselves QD algorithms, both of the following two
controls are included in the study to establish the importance of
specializedapproachesthatsimultaneouslybalancedrivestoward
behavioral diversity and locally increasing quality. The controls
thus, respectively, exemplify searching with quality pressure
alone and with diversity pressure alone.
4.1.1. [Fitness] Neuroevolution
of Augmenting Topologies
Thefirstcontrol,whichincludesonlyaqualitycomponent,repre-
sents a traditional objective-oriented optimization approach and
isimplementedasstandardgenerationalNEAT(NeuroEvolution
of Augmenting Topologies) (Stanley and Miikkulainen, 2002)
with a population size of 500. Agents are rewarded according to
the Euclidean distance between their final position and the goal
point (this heuristic also underlies the quality component of all
of the QD algorithms throughout this paper). NEAT includes
a sophisticated speciation and fitness-sharing mechanism for
maintaining genetic diversity across the population. However,
as the canonical HardMaze experiments (Lehman and Stanley,
2008, 2011a) reveal, genetic diversity is often not enough to
overcome the problem of deception on difficult maze-navigation
tasks, which instead favor rewarding behavioral diversity (a criti-
cal component of QD algorithms).
4.1.2. [NS] Novelty Search
The novelty search (NS) (Lehman and Stanley, 2008, 2011a) algo-
rithmrepresentstheotherextreme:searchingonlyforbehavioral
diversity with no fixed objective at all (i.e., NS has no “quality
component”). Novelty search works by rewarding novelty instead
of fitness, where novelty measures how different an individual’s
behaviorisfromthosewhohavebeenseenbefore.Moreformally,
novelty is calculated by summing the distances to the k-nearest
behaviors (in this paper, k = 20) from a set composed of the cur-
rent population and an archive of past behaviors. The distance
between two behaviors is simply the Euclidean distance between
those behaviors when represented as a vector of numbers (which
is the origin of the term behavior characterization or BC). While
there exist several different strategies for managing the archive
(Gomes et al., 2015), preliminary experiments indicated that an
effective strategy is to add all individuals to an archive with a
maximum size that is enforced by deleting those with the lowest
novelty (the novelty of all archive members is recomputed before
each deletion). In this study, NS has a population size of 500 and
a maximum archive size of 2,500.
4.2. Quality Diversity Algorithms
Each of the following algorithms features both of the essential
components of QD: pressure to discover more behavioral niches
and a tendency toward increasing performance in niches that
have already been discovered.
4.2.1. [NSLC] Novelty Search with Local Competition
Perhaps, the first true QD algorithm, novelty search with local
competition (NSLC) (Lehman and Stanley, 2011b) combines
the diversifying power of NS with a localized fitness pressure
called local competition (LC), calculated as the proportion of
an individual’s k-nearest (k = 20) behavior neighbors that have
a lower-fitness score. LC allows a quality-based reward to be
assigned within behavioral neighborhoods without asserting
that some neighborhoods are better than others. In NSLC,
novelty and LC are combined by Pareto ranking following the
practice of the NSGA-II multi-objective optimization algorithm
(Deb et al., 2002).
4.2.2. [ME] Multi-Dimensional Archive
of Phenotypic Elites
An alternative approach to QD is an algorithm called Multi-
dimensional Archive of Phenotypic Elites (MAP-Elites or ME)
(Cully et al., 2015; Mouret and Clune, 2015). The key difference
inMAP-Elitesisthatnichesareexplicitlydefinedratherthanpas-
sively emergent from a system of local competition; the behavior
space is divided into a number of discrete behavior bins (often
called a “grid” and created by discretizing each dimension of the
BC) where each bin remembers the single fittest individual ever
mapped to that bin. The set of filled bins constitutes the active
population and evolution proceeds by selecting a bin at random
(with equal probability) to produce an offspring, which is then
mapped to a bin corresponding to its behavior where it may be
either saved or discarded depending on whether its fitness is
higherorlowerthanthecurrenteliteoccupant.Becauseselection
is uniform, the hope is to acquire diversity passively by virtue of
theobservationthatmorebinswilltendtofillovertimeand,once
filled, they will not be forgotten.
4.2.3. [MENOV] MAP-Elites + Novelty
Unlike NS and NSLC, the original formulation of MAP-Elites
does not preferentially explore under-represented behaviors,
potentially causing it to lag in its discovery of new types of
behaviors. Conveniently, it is easy to augment MAP-Elites with
a stronger focus on diversity by simply making selection pro-
portional to novelty. In this variant, called MAP-Elites + Novelty
(MENOV),wheneveroffspringaregenerated,theyarealsoadded
to an archive of past behaviors (with a maximum size of 2,500,
managed in the same way as in NS) that enables calculating a
novelty score for all members in the MAP-Elites grid.
4.2.4. [MEPGD] MAP-Elites + Passive
Genetic Diversity
ThestrictelitismateachbinintheoriginalMAP-Elitesformulation
mayeventuallycauseevolutiontostagnateifallsteppingstonesto
higher fitness require first making strides through lower-fitness
space.Furthermore,geneticdiversityisintrinsicallylimitedwhen
only a single individual is saved in each bin. Addressing both of
these potential pitfalls without introducing any additional over-
head, a new variant called MAP-Elites + Passive Genetic Diversity
(MEPGD) saves two individuals in each bin instead of one.3
Individuals with a lower fitness than the current elite still have a
3
The number of extra slots per bin can conceivably be expanded to any number,
where all slots except the first are governed by random replacement.8
Pugh et al. Quality Diversity: A New Frontier
Frontiers in Robotics and AI | www.frontiersin.org July 2016 | Volume 3 | Article 40
30% chance of being saved in the second slot, regardless of their
fitness, thus allowing MEPGD to explore the potential of some
lineages that would have otherwise been discarded. Importantly,
these extra slots coincide with the set of MAP-Elites bins, which
guarantees that they are behaviorally diverse.
4.3. Multi-BC Quality Diversity Algorithms
As discussed in Section 2.3, BCs that are strongly aligned with
quality encourage the discovery of better behaviors simply by
finding different behaviors, effectively bypassing the problem of
deception that causes optimization-oriented search processes to
become trapped in local optima. However, no such advantage
existsforunalignedBCs,whichoftenrepresentthemostinterest-
ing and desirable types of diversity in practice. Worryingly, Pugh
et al. (2015) find that such unaligned BCs actually negatively
impact the performance of QD algorithms, which on sufficiently
hard problems may translate into an outright failure to find the
best-performing solutions. This observation raises the important
question of how QD practitioners can find unaligned diversity
without losing the ability to circumvent deception offered by
aligned BCs.
This section offers a promising answer in the form of driving
search with multiple BCs simultaneously. To explore this idea, the
following algorithms represent various options for adapting QD
to support more than one BC.
4.3.1. [NS–NS] Multi-BC Novelty Search
Novelty search can be extended to support multiple BCs simul-
taneously by calculating a separate novelty score for each BC and
then combining these scores in a multi-objective formulation
[via NSGA-II of Deb et al. (2002)]. Each BC maintains its own
independent archive against which individuals are evaluated to
determine their novelty score for that BC. There is only a single
population where the breeding potential for each member is
decided by a Pareto ranking according to the various novelty
scores. Although NS is not itself a QD algorithm because it lacks
a mechanism for discovered behaviors to increase in quality,
when extended to include multiple BCs, NS–NS can conceivably
achieve some success if one BC serves to find diversity while
anotherpromotesincreasingquality(e.g.,anunalignedBCpaired
withanalignedBC).Notethatevensuchapairingdoesnotquite
embodythespiritofQDbecauseanytendencytowardincreasing
quality that emerges from an aligned BC is not explicitly local.
4.3.2. [NS–NSLC] Multi-BC Novelty
Search with Local Competition
The idea of NS–NS can then be expanded to include a drive
toward locally increasing quality by adding a LC objective (in the
same way as NSLC) where behavioral neighbors are decided by
the unaligned BC that expresses the notion of diversity that the
userisultimatelyinterestedincollecting.TheresultingNS–NSLC
algorithm therefore includes three distinct objectives (combined
via NSGA-II): (1) a quality-aligned novelty score to facilitate
overcoming deception, (2) an unaligned novelty score for dis-
coveringnewbehaviorsofinterest,and(3)anunalignedLCscore
to promote competition within niches of similar behaviors.
4.3.3. [ME–ME] Multi-BC MAP-Elites
Inanefforttomaintainitscharacteristicsimplicity,MAP-Elitesis
extended to support multiple BCs by maintaining a separate grid
for each BC (with similar maximum sizes). On each iteration of
ME–ME,anequalamountofparentsareselectedfromeachgrid,
and their resulting offspring are mapped to both grids (where the
decisions to save or discard them are performed independently,
e.g., between two grids, a single offspring may be saved in one,
both, or neither).
4.3.4. [MENOV–MENOV] Multi-BC
MAP-Elites + Novelty
Finally, MENOV is extended to MENOV–MENOV similarly to
ME–ME except where each grid also maintains its own novelty
archive and selection within each grid is proportional to novelty.
5. EXPERIMENTS
The behavior characterization (BC) determines the form of
pressure that ultimately drives the diversity component of the
search and thus must be selected carefully to complement the
evolutionary algorithm. The experiments in this article explore
two BCs that are each highly aligned or highly misaligned with
the notion of quality (i.e., how close an agent is to arriving at the
goal): EndpointBC, which is simply a two-dimensional vector
containing the x and y coordinates of an individual’s location at
the end of its trial, and DirectionBC, a five-dimensional vector
with entries indicating whether the individual was most fre-
quently facing north (0.125), east (0.375), south (0.625), or west
(0.875) for each fifth of its evaluation time. On the one hand,
EndpointBC is thus highly aligned with the goal of navigating to
the goal point because the continual discovery of new endpoints
will eventually lead to finding the goal point. On the other hand,
DirectionBCislargelyorthogonaltoqualitybecausethedirection
a robot faces at a particular time step does not fully determine
whether it solves the maze (more importantly, it is possible to
visit all of the behaviors in the DirectionBC space without ever
reaching the goal).
Consistent with the observation that the goal of QD appli-
cations in practice is often to find diversity with respect to an
unaligned BC, the assumption in this study is that the goal is to
find QD with respect to DirectionBC. Therefore, exploring how
different approaches to QD interact with each of EndpointBC
and DirectionBC makes it possible to address several important
questions:
1. How well does the approach suggested by current literature
(i.e., driving search with the very notion of diversity you are
interested in collecting) work? Given that preliminary experi-
ments from Pugh et al. (2015) show that DirectionBC some-
times results in suboptimal QD-scores even in the relatively
simple small maze, the hypothesis is that this conventional
approachwillnotbeoptimaloncomplexdomainssuchasthe
gauntlet mazes.
2. Can diversity with respect to DirectionBC be found without
searching for it explicitly? That is, EndpointBC has been
shown to be effective for driving novelty search to findTABLE 2 | Fifteen treatments compared with three mazes.
No BC DirectionBC EndpointBC Multi-BC
Fitness NSd NSe NSeNSd
NSLCd NSLCe NSeNSLCd
MEd MEe MEeMEd
MENOVd MENOVe MENOVeMENOVd
MEPGDd MEPGDe
Algorithms in different columns differ by the BC that drives search. Conventional
QD algorithms are tested with each of DirectionBC and EndpointBC driving search
(denoted by the subscripts d and e, respectively), while a new class of multi-BC QD
algorithms drives search with both DirectionBC and EndpointBC simultaneously.
9
Pugh et al. Quality Diversity: A New Frontier
Frontiers in Robotics and AI | www.frontiersin.org July 2016 | Volume 3 | Article 40
solutions to deceptive mazes (Lehman and Stanley, 2008).
However, it is unknown whether it is similarly effective at
finding QD when diversity is measured on a separate una-
ligned metric. The hypothesis is that algorithms driven by
EndpointBC should do well in terms of progress toward the
goal, but may not necessarily result in high diversity with
respect to DirectionBC.
3. Finally, can multiple BCs successfully be combined to com-
pensate for the shortcomings of highly aligned BCs (lower
diversity) and unaligned BCs (lower performance)?
Each of the algorithms from Section 4 is implemented with
some combination of DirectionBC and EndpointBC for a total
of fifteen treatments, enumerated in Table 2. Each treatment
is run 20 times on the small maze, symmetric gauntlet, and
asymmetric gauntlet for a total of 900 runs (300 per maze).
Small maze runs ended after 250,000 evaluations and gauntlet
runs ended after 1,000,000 evaluations (in each case, more than
enough time for all algorithms to reach a performance plateau).
Networks are evolved with a modified version of SharpNEAT
1.0 (Green, 2003) with mutation parameters validated by Pugh
et al. (2015): 60% mutate connection, 10% add connection, and
0.5% add neuron. Networks are feedforward and restricted to
asexual reproduction; other settings follow SharpNEAT 1.0
defaults. Maze-specific parameter settings are presented in
Table 1.
Intraditionalmazenavigationdomains,anappropriatemetric
would be whether or not a robot was eventually able to navigate
to the goal. However, this metric does not speak to an algorithm’s
propensity for discovering diversity in a search space. For this
reason, Pugh et al. (2015) introduces a new QD metric [which is
alsosimilartothe“globalreliability”metricinMouretandClune
(2015)] that reflects both the quality and diversity of individu-
als found by evolution (including solutions and non-solutions).
Diversity in this metric, called the QD-score, is measured with
respect to a BC. In the experiments reported in this article,
DirectionBC always characterizes diversity for the purpose of
computing the QD-score regardless of the behavior characteriza-
tion driving search. This approach reflects the usual idea that the
desire is to see a wide diversity of solutions at the end of a run
with respect to a BC that is not necessarily directly aligned with
solving the problem.
Toquantifyhowmuchofthespaceisexploredbyanalgorithm
fortheQD-score,theentirebehaviorspaceisfirstdiscretizedinto
a collection of t bins4
{N1, …, Nt} as in the MAP-Elites algorithm
described in the previous section. Each bin corresponds to a
unique combination of features from the individual’s BC (in this
case, DirectionBC) and represents a niche in the behavior space.
Diversity is then quantified as the number of bins filled over the
course of an evolutionary run. By summing the highest fitness val-
ues found in each grid bin, where Qi represents the highest fitness
achievedinbinNi,itbecomespossibletosimultaneouslyquantify
both quality and diversity as
QD-score = .
=
∑ i
t
i Q
1
This DirectionBC-based QD-score5
is the primary metric in
all mazes. Note that for the purpose of calculating QD-score,
fitness is defined in a way that reflects the shortest drivable path
between an agent ending location and the goal, respecting that
agents cannot drive through walls. This special QD-score fitness
is calculated by a breadth-first flood fill from the goal point,
assigning fitness to locations in the maze that decreases linearly
ateachlayerofthefloodfill.Importantly,thisfitnessvalue,which
draws a perfect non-deceptive gradient over the maze, is not
available to any algorithms to drive search but merely appears
during post hoc analysis to give an accurate accounting for how
close each collected behavior is to solving the maze.
Due to the overwhelming historical focus on optimization
and the recent realization that behavioral diversity can itself be
a powerful tool for optimization (Lehman and Stanley, 2008;
Mouret and Doncieux, 2009, 2012), this study includes an addi-
tionalperformancemetricforthetwogauntlets6
thatcapturesthe
spirit of this more conventional search paradigm: the total maze
progress metric measures how close a run is to solving all four
legsofthemaze.Moreprecisely,totalmazeprogressisthesumof
four progress measures (one per leg) where progress for each leg
increases linearly as endpoints are discovered further along their
solutionpath(calculatedbymeansofthefloodfilldistancetothe
goal point). If Ei is the set of all flood fill fitness scores associated
with endpoints discovered inside leg i then total maze progress
can be quantified as
total maze progress = .
=
∑ i
i E
1
4
max
A maximum score is achieved by solving all four legs. Total
mazeprogressthereforeaddressestheimportantquestionofhow
well-suited QD algorithms are to the task of optimizing toward a
series of predefined targets.7
4
In this study, t = 1024 when discretizing the DirectionBC behavior space.
5
The original small maze results from Pugh et al. (2015) instead always measure
diversity with respect to the BC that drives search and thus do not explore the idea
of driving search with BCs other than those which characterize the dimensions
of interest.
6
No such metric is defined for the small maze because all treatments consistently
andquicklyfindsolutionsandthusitdoesnotrepresentachallengingoptimization
problem.
7
Total maze progress is related to the interests of multimodal optimization, where
thegoalisoftentofindalloftheglobaloptimainafitnesslandscapewithoutregard
to the behaviors or phenotypes that get there.FIGURE 5 | Total maze progress (symmetric gauntlet). The final total
maze progress achieved by each of fifteen treatments (Table 2) after
1,000,000 evaluations on the symmetric gauntlet is shown (averaged over 20
runs). Bars are color coded according to which BC drives search (see section
6) and error bars represent SE. A maximum possible score of 400
corresponds to solving all four legs of the maze.
FIGURE 4 | Total maze progress (asymmetric gauntlet). The final total
maze progress achieved by each of fifteen treatments (Table 2) after
1,000,000 evaluations on the asymmetric gauntlet is shown (averaged over
20 runs). Bars are color coded according to which BC drives search (see
section 6) and error bars represent SE. A maximum possible score of 400
corresponds to solving all four legs of the maze.
10
Pugh et al. Quality Diversity: A New Frontier
Frontiers in Robotics and AI | www.frontiersin.org July 2016 | Volume 3 | Article 40
6. RESULTS
In all of the figures presented in this section, treatments are
color coded according to which BC drives search: DirectionBC
(subscriptd)isdrawninblue,EndpointBC(subscripte)inyellow,
multi-BC in green, and Fitness (which is not driven by any BC)
in gray. For each treatment, results represent an average over 20
runs;errorbarsrepresenttheSEMandcanbeinterpretedtoinfer
whichdifferencesarestatisticallysignificantwhenpvaluesarenot
explicitly provided. In all reported cases, statistical significance is
determined by an unpaired two-tailed Student’s t-test.8
6.1. Total Maze Progress
The total maze progress achieved by each treatment after all
evaluations is depicted in Figure 4 (asymmetric gauntlet) and
Figure 5 (symmetric gauntlet). A maximum possible score
of 400 corresponds to solving all four legs in the same run,
although such scores are not observed in practice. Unlike in
the small maze, where all treatments consistently find solutions
in every run, many gauntlet runs (particularly those of Fitness
or DirectionBC-driven treatments) do not find solutions at all,
reflecting the increased difficulty in the gauntlet mazes. Of the
two gauntlet mazes surveyed by this metric, higher scores are
obtainedbyalltreatmentsontheasymmetricgauntlet,indicating
thattheasymmetricgauntletiscomparativelyeasiertosolve,thus
establishing a continuum of difficulty between the three maze
domains featured in this study: small maze (easiest), asymmetric
gauntlet (harder), and symmetric gauntlet (hardest).
While in both gauntlets the performance of Fitness is sub-
par as expected [it is known to struggle with deception in maze
8
The simple Student’s t-test is chosen intentionally to avoid Type II errors, which
are more likely when adjusting for multiple comparisons. As such, the results here
areintendedtohighlightpotentialdifferencesbetweentreatments,nottoestablish
a definitive ranking.
domains;LehmanandStanley(2008)],aperhapsmoresurprising
result is that all DirectionBC-driven treatments perform sig-
nificantly worse than Fitness in terms of ability to find solutions
(p < 0.05) to both the asymmetric gauntlet (Figure 4) and the
symmetricgauntlet(Figure5).Indeed,ofthesetreatmentsonthe
symmetric gauntlet, only MEPGDd finds any solutions at all (two
solutions found across all 20 runs).
On the other hand, all approaches that include an aligned BC
(EndpointBC) always perform significantly better than Fitness
(p < 0.001). Of those treatments that include EndpointBC,
single-BC approaches tend to perform better (with respect to
solving the maze) than multi-BC approaches that also include
DirectionBC (Figures 4 and 5). This phenomenon is especially
apparent on the harder symmetric gauntlet (Figure 5), where
NSLCe and NSe perform significantly better than the multi-BC
variants (p < 0.05). Of particular interest is that specialized QD
algorithms such as NSLCe are competitive with the currently
accepted method for overcoming deception on maze tasks: NSe
(Lehman and Stanley, 2008, 2011a). On the symmetric gauntlet
(Figure 5), there is some evidence that NSLCe may actually be
better than NSe, although the evidence is not strong enough to
establish statistical significance (p = 0.093).
Of the successful MAP-Elites variants (those driven by
EndpointBC), MEPGDe performs significantly better than the
core MEe on both gauntlets (Figures 4 and 5), while MENOVe in
neither case is significantly different than MEe.
6.2. QD-Score
The final QD-score achieved by each treatment after all evalua-
tions is depicted in Figure 6 (small maze), Figure 7 (asymmetric
gauntlet), and Figure 8 (symmetric gauntlet).
6.2.1. Small Maze
Reflecting its lack of challenging complexity, the best treatments
on the small maze (Figure 6) consistently achieve near theFIGURE 8 | Final QD-score (symmetric gauntlet). The QD-score
achieved by each of fifteen treatments (Table 2) after 1,000,000 evaluations
on the symmetric gauntlet is shown (averaged over 20 runs). Bars are color
coded according to which BC drives search (see section 6) and error bars
represent SE. In all cases, QD-score is measured with respect to
DirectionBC.
FIGURE 7 | Final QD-score (asymmetric gauntlet). The QD-score
achieved by each of fifteen treatments (Table 2) after 1,000,000 evaluations
on the asymmetric gauntlet is shown (averaged over 20 runs). Bars are color
coded according to which BC drives search (see section 6) and error bars
represent SE. In all cases, QD-score is measured with respect to
DirectionBC.
FIGURE 6 | Final QD-score (small maze). The QD-score achieved by each
of fifteen treatments (Table 2) after 250,000 evaluations on the small maze is
shown (averaged over 20 runs). Bars are color coded according to which BC
drives search (see section 6) and error bars represent SE. In all cases,
QD-score is measured with respect to DirectionBC. The maximum possible
QD-score on the small maze is 1,024,000 corresponding to a perfect solution
in all 1,024 bins.
11
Pugh et al. Quality Diversity: A New Frontier
Frontiers in Robotics and AI | www.frontiersin.org July 2016 | Volume 3 | Article 40
maximum possible QD-score of 1,024,000, which corresponds
to finding a maze solution (score = 1000) in each of the 1,024
bins. On this relatively simple task, QD-score is dominated by
the multi-BC QD approaches (MEeMEd, MENOVeMENOVd,
NSeNSLCd) and by NSLCd. EndpointBC-driven approaches
perform poorly in comparison, though not as poorly as Fitness
and NSd.
Of interest is the comparatively large variance on the MAP-
Elites variants (when driven by DirectionBC) versus their
NS-basedcounterparts(Figure6).Inparticular,themostextreme
such variance, on MEd, is caused by three outliers. While most
runs of MEd score between 950 K and 1000 K, the outlier runs
obtainscoresof791K,680K,and421K.Ineachoftheseruns,the
grid is completely filled (representing maximum diversity), but
many bins contain low-quality behaviors (mostly representing
agents that exclusively drive around inside the main deceptive
trap). Thus, the higher variance observed by MEd here is indica-
tive of MAP-Elites sometimes becoming stuck in local optima.
6.2.2. Gauntlet Mazes
Becauseofthestricttimeconstraintsonthegauntletmazes,many
types of behaviors (i.e., bins in the QD grid) can never repre-
sent full solutions even in theory; thus, the maximum possible
QD-score on the gauntlet mazes is lower than on the small maze
andalsodifficulttoachieveinpractice.Thislimitationisreflected
bythecomparativelylowerscoresobservedinboththeasymmet-
ric gauntlet (Figure 7) and the symmetric gauntlet (Figure 8).
While DirectionBC-driven QD achieves the highest scores on
the small maze (Figure 6), this trend is reversed as domain diffi-
cultyincreases.Ontheasymmetricgauntlet,treatmentsdrivenby
EndpointBC perform similarly to those driven by DirectionBC
(Figure7).Onthecomparativelymoredifficultsymmetricgaunt-
let, the trend is completely reversed, with EndpointBC-driven
approaches performing significantly better than those who are
driven only by DirectionBC (Figure 8).
Consistently with the small maze, in each of the gauntlets,
QD-score is dominated by the best multi-BC treatments.
Specifically, in all three mazes, NSeNSLCd is consistently among
the best-performing treatments (Figures 6–8). On the asym-
metric gauntlet (Figure 7), its lead is unmatched, while on the
symmetricgauntletitistiedwithNSLCe (Figure8;the difference
between NSLCe and NSeNSLCd is not statistically significant,
p = 0.163).620,000
660,000
700,000
740,000
780,000
820,000
0 250,000 500,000 750,000 1,000,000
QD-Score
Evaluaons
NSLCe
NSeNSLCd
MEPGDd
FIGURE 9 | QD-score over time (symmetric gauntlet). The progression
of the QD-score on the symmetric gauntlet for the best-performing treatment
from each class (according to the BC that drives search; DirectionBC:
MEPGDd, EndpointBC: NSLCe, multi-BC: NSeNSLCd) is graphed over time
(averaged over 20 runs). The main result is that multi-BC treatments exhibit
the best characteristics of each component BC: both increasing quickly and
reaching high scores.
12
Pugh et al. Quality Diversity: A New Frontier
Frontiers in Robotics and AI | www.frontiersin.org July 2016 | Volume 3 | Article 40
However, it turns out that even though their final QD-scores
are similar on the symmetric gauntlet, NSLCe and NSeNSLCd do
exhibit different learning curves. To highlight this difference on
the symmetric gauntlet, it is instructive to graph the develop-
ment of QD-score over the course of evolution. Figure 9 depicts
the QD-score over time for the best-performing method from
each of the three classes in Table 2: EndpointBC, DirectionBC,
and multi-BC. The general trend displayed by each treatment
is representative of the other treatments in its respective class,
e.g., DirectionBC-driven treatments tend to increase quickly and
then plateau at a low score. On the other hand, NSLCe increases
relatively slowly before ultimately reaching a much higher score.
Combining the best of both of these options, NSeNSLCd quickly
reacheshighscores(Figure9).Thus,overallthehybridNSeNSLCd
proves a competitive choice for maximizing QD-score on all the
variant mazes.
7. DISCUSSION
Withinthewide-rangingfieldofEC,twodistincttypesofresearch
goalsarerelevantinthecontextofthisinvestigation.Thefirstand
historicallymostdominantfocusofECisthetaskofoptimization:
harnessing the powerful natural mechanism of “survival of the
fittest” to reach some predefined target (or series of targets). It is
this goal that lies at the heart of the vast majority of EC literature,
thereby seemingly aligning the ambitions of EC with the broader
practiceofmachinelearning,whereoptimizationistreatedasthe
essenceoflearningitself.However,havingonlyrecentlybegunto
garner attention, the second type of research goal is less familiar,
though it offers promising new opportunities for discovery and
advancement uniquely accessible to EC. This goal, called quality
diversity, represents a fundamental departure from optimization
becauseinsteadtheideaistoexploreallofwhatispossiblerather
than to find only the best option. While the primary intention of
thispaperistopromotethetheoryandpracticeofQD,theresults
of this study have implications relevant to both paradigms.
The recent realization that pursuing behavioral diversity can
help to overcome deception (Lehman and Stanley, 2008, 2011a;
Mouret and Doncieux, 2009, 2012) has offered a source of hope
to solving the problem of deception that permeates almost every
optimization space of interest. However, deception does not
exclusively affect optimization and not all notions of “behavioral
diversity”areequallycapableofthwartingit.Asthisstudyreveals,
simply focusing on QD does not make evolution immune to the
problem of deception because the quality-seeking component
of QD algorithms can itself fall victim to it. In this study, which
features maze tasks of varying difficulty, QD algorithms follow-
ing the compass of an unaligned BC are incrementally less able
to find QD as the level of deception increases from one maze
to another (Figures 6–8). Further highlighting the problem of
deception even in QD, surprisingly, as maze difficulty increases,
it actually becomes more effective to drive search with an aligned
BC even when you are collecting unaligned QD (Figure 8). The
primary lesson is that searching for diversity with respect to an
unaligned BC does not circumvent the problem of deception
(doing so is mostly orthogonal to overcoming deception, similar
to the shortcomings of pursuing genetic diversity). However, for
QD practitioners, the magic bullet cannot be to simply drive
searchwithsomeother,better-suitedBCbecausethatonlyleaves
the diversity of interest to be collected coincidentally. Instead,
this study offers the promising new idea of driving search with
multiple BCs simultaneously. The so-called multi-BC algorithms
(suchasNS–NSLC)allowsearchtobedrivenbothbythedesired
notion of diversity and a separate BC that is well equipped to
circumventdeception,thusunlockingthebestpartsofthesearch
space for discovery.
An alternative approach not tested in this study is to simply
concatenate both an aligned and unaligned BC into a single BC
withmoredimensions.Inconsideringthisoption,itisimportant
to note that the behavior space grows exponentially with the size
of the BC. Thus, such an approach generally cannot be applied
with MAP-Elites because the number of bins would also grow
exponentially until the grid no longer resembles a reasonably
sized population. While concatenating multiple BCs into a single
monolithic BC is still tractable with NS-based algorithms, the
resultingvastbehaviorspacemaypresentanadditionalchallenge
over the multi-BC approaches tested here.
Following the lesson originally presented by Lehman and
Stanley (2008), this study reconfirms that a powerful strategy for
finding solutions to a difficult maze is to abandon the objective
entirely and simply search for behavioral diversity (e.g., NSe in
Figures 4 and 5). This conclusion itself has implications outside
of maze solving that apply more generally to all of optimization.
However, an important observation is that not just any type of
behavioral diversity is successful. Indeed, with regard to being
able to solve difficult mazes, searching for diversity with respect
to an unaligned BC (such as DirectionBC) does even worse than
purely objective search (Figure 5). The more general lesson
is that BCs that are aligned with the notion of quality (such as
EndpointBC in this study) are the key ingredient to overcoming
deception on difficult problems. Furthermore, this study offers
the additional insight that QD algorithms themselves offer a
means for “the objective-less search for behavioral diversity”
(i.e., novelty search) to be rectified with their missing objective
in a way that allows search to respect the ultimate goal (e.g.,13
Pugh et al. Quality Diversity: A New Frontier
Frontiers in Robotics and AI | www.frontiersin.org July 2016 | Volume 3 | Article 40
solving the maze) without re-introducing the problem of decep-
tion. Specifically, NSLCe in this paper demonstrates that it can
optimize in the presence of strong deception at least as well as
regular novelty search (Figure 4) and, in fact, might even be bet-
ter (Figure 5). This result suggests that while the ultimate goals
of QD are distinct from optimization, advancements in QD can
themselves directly benefit optimization.
As a relatively new approach to QD, MAP-Elites remains a
largely unexplored paradigm at the time of this writing. The
core MAP-Elites algorithm offers the significant appeal of a very
simplealgorithm(requiringineffectonlyafewlinesofcode)that
powerfully distills the essence of QD. Because it is relatively new,
its performance in this study serves to confirm that it is largely
impacted by BCs similarly to NS-based methods (suggesting
some general principles for QD across different algorithms), but
of course much room remains for MAP-Elites in particular to
be improved. MENOV and MEPGD in this study both suggest
thatthecoreMEalgorithmcanbefruitfullyaugmentedinpartto
overcomeanyrestrictiveeffectsofitsstrictelitism.Someideasnot
tested here include MEPGDNOV (combining genetic diversity
with novelty) and MEPGD–MEPGD (ME with genetic diversity
and multiple BCs). The genetic diversity component might also
benefit from expansion to more than one diversity candidate per
bin.
An important question raised by the results is how to decide
whether a particular domain is hard (therefore likely requiring
morethanoneBC)andinsuchcaseswhetherthechosenaligned
BC is sufficiently aligned to overcome the threat of deception.
One way to decide whether it may be necessary to include mul-
tiple BCs is simply to run a pure fitness-based (objective-driven)
search. If such a search consistently finds solutions in multiple
runs then the domain can be considered sufficiently easy that
multiple BCs may be unnecessary. On the other hand, if the
domain proves too difficult for fitness, then it is important to
make sure that the aligned BC is, in fact, sufficiently aligned to
complementtheunalignedBC.Onewaytotestforalignmentisto
try running simple NS only with the candidate aligned BC. If the
alignment is effective, such a search should at least do better than
fitness-based search, which would then validate that the BC in
questioncancomplementanunalignedBCinamulti-BChybrid.
Interestingly, while the results support that in sufficiently easy
domains a more naive single-BC approach with an unaligned
BC may work to collect QD, it does not appear harmful in any
case to take the safer multi-BC approach even then. Thus, even
though it has been customary so far in the QD-related literature
to rely on a single unaligned BC (Lehman and Stanley, 2011b;
Cully and Mouret, 2013; Szerlip and Stanley, 2013; Mouret and
Clune, 2015), it may be possible to revisit some of the domains of
the past with multiple BCs and achieve even better performance.
More broadly, the multi-BC approach and our new under-
standing of the implications of alignment can help us in the
future to achieve significantly more impressive results with QD
than seen in the past. Even domains that might have seemed
inexplicably out of reach might now become accessible through
the application of multiple BCs. Thus, because QD represents a
promising direction exclusive to evolutionary techniques, it is in
the interest not just of those working in QD, but EC and evolu-
tionary robotics as a whole to seek out and propose such future
domains. The potential for such ideas is foreshadowed by QD
results already published in the diverse domains of morphology
evolution (Lehman and Stanley, 2011b; Szerlip and Stanley, 2013;
Mouret and Clune, 2015), robot control and adaptation (Cully
and Mouret, 2013; Cully et al., 2015; Mouret and Clune, 2015),
imagegeneration(Nguyenetal.,2015a,b),andthree-dimensional
objectevolution(Lehmanetal.,2016).Withincreasinginterestin
the field, these domains may be just the beginning for QD.
8. CONCLUSION
Inanattempttounifyandinvestigatetheemergingfieldofquality
diversity (QD), this paper compared various QD algorithm vari-
antsandcontrolsinthreedifferentmazedomains,twoofahigher
level of complexity than previously seen in such maze-based
studies. By pushing the mazes to a higher level of complexity
than seen in QD before, the study was able to expose conditions
underwhichQDeffectivelybreaksdown.Itturnsoutthatdriving
the diversity component of QD algorithms exclusively by a BC
unaligned with quality (which is heretofore common practice)
performs relatively poorly under such difficult conditions.
However, on a positive note, methods that hybridize more than
one BC (one aligned and one unaligned) tend to perform well at
the same time as finding the kind of diversity desired, suggesting
a promising path forward for QD in the future as it is applied in
increasingly ambitious domains.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
JP helped conceive the work and led experimental design,
implementation, and writing. LS helped conceive the work and
contributed to experimental design, implementation, and writ-
ing. KS provided vision and oversight, helped conceive the work,
and contributed to experimental design and writing.
FUNDING
This work was supported by the National Science Foundation
undergrantno.IIS-1421925.Anyopinions,findings,andconclu-
sions or recommendations expressed in this material are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Science Foundation.
REFERENCES
Bäck, T., Hammel, U., and Schwefel, H.-P. (1997). Evolutionary computation:
comments on the history and current state. IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput. 1, 3–17.
doi:10.1109/4235.585888
Bedau, M. (2008). “The arrow of complexity hypothesis (abstract),” in Proceedings
of the Eleventh International Conference on Artificial Life (Alife XI), eds S.
Bullock,J.Noble,R.Watson,andM.Bedau (Cambridge,MA:MITPress),750.
Bishop,C.M.(2006).PatternRecognitionandMachineLearning,Vol.1.NewYork,
NY: Springer.14
Pugh et al. Quality Diversity: A New Frontier
Frontiers in Robotics and AI | www.frontiersin.org July 2016 | Volume 3 | Article 40
Boden, M. (2006). Mind as Machine: A History of Cognitive Science. USA: Oxford
University Press.
Bongard, J. C. (2002). “Evolving modular genetic regulatory networks,” in
Proceedings of the 2002 Congress on Evolutionary Computation, Honolulu
(Washington, DC: IEEE).
Cliff,D.,Harvey,I.,andHusbands,P.(1993).Explorationsinevolutionaryrobotics.
Adapt. Behav. 2, 73–110. doi:10.1177/105971239300200104
Cortes, C., and Vapnik, V. (1995). Support-vector networks. Mach. Learn. 20,
273–297. doi:10.1007/BF00994018
Cully, A., Clune, J., Tarapore, D., and Mouret, J.-B. (2015). Robots that can adapt
like animals. Nature 521, 503–507. doi:10.1038/nature14422
Cully, A., and Mouret, J.-B. (2013). “Behavioral repertoire learning in robotics,”
in Proceeding of the Fifteenth Annual Conference on Genetic and Evolutionary
Computation (GECCO ‘13) (New York, NY: ACM), 175–182.
DeJong,K.A.(2002).EvolutionaryComputation:AUnifiedPerspective.Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Deb, K., Pratap, A., Agarwal, S., and Meyarivan, T. (2002). A fast and elitist multi-
objective genetic algorithm: NSGA-II. IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput. 6, 182–197.
doi:10.1109/4235.996017
Doncieux, S., Bredeche, N., Mouret, J.-B., and Eiben, A. G. (2015). Evolutionary
robotics: what, why, and where to. Front. Robot. AI 2:4. doi:10.3389/frobt.
2015.00004
Doucette, J., and Heywood, M. I. (2010). “Novelty-based fitness: an evaluation
under the santa fe trail,” in Proceedings of the European Conference on Genetic
Programming (EuroGP-2010), Istanbul (Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag),
50–61.
Fogel, L. J., Owens, A. J., and Walsh, M. J. (1966). Artificial Intelligence Through
Simulated Evolution. New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons.
Goldberg, D. E. (1989). Genetic Algorithms in Search, Optimization and Machine
Learning. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Goldberg, D. E., and Richardson, J. (1987). ‘‘Genetic algorithms with sharing for
multimodalfunctionoptimization,’’inGeneticAlgorithmsandtheirApplications:
Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Genetic Algorithms, ed.
J. J. Grefenstette (Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum), 41–49.
Goldsby, H. J., and Cheng, B. H. (2010). “Automatically discovering properties
that specify the latent behavior of UML models,” in Model Driven Engineering
Languages and Systems (Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer), 316–330.
Gomes, J., and Christensen, A. L. (2013). “Generic behaviour similarity measures
for evolutionary swarm robotics,” in Proceeding of the Fifteenth Annual
Conference on Genetic and Evolutionary Computation (GECCO ‘13) (New York,
NY: ACM), 199–206.
Gomes, J., Mariano, P., and Christensen, A. L. (2015). “Devising effective novelty
search algorithms: a comprehensive empirical study,” in Proceedings of the 17th
Annual Conference on Genetic and Evolutionary Computation, Madrid (New
York, NY: ACM), 943–950.
Gomes, J., Urbano, P., and Christensen, A. L. (2013). Evolution of swarm
robotics systems with novelty search. Swarm Intell. 7, 115–144. doi:10.1007/
s11721-013-0081-z
Graening, L., Aulig, N., and Olhofer, M. (2010). “Towards directed open-ended
search by a novelty guided evolution strategy,” in Parallel Problem Solving from
Nature – PPSN XI. Vol. 6239 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Krakow,
eds R. Schaefer, C. Cotta, J. Kołodziej, and G. Rudolph (Berlin, Heidelberg:
Springer), 71–80.
Green, C. (2003–2006). SharpNEAT Homepage. Available at: http://sharpneat.
sourceforge.net/
Holland,J. H.(1975).AdaptationinNaturalandArtificialSystems:AnIntroductory
Analysis with Applications to Biology, Control and Artificial Intelligence. Ann
Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.
Hornby, G. S., and Pollack, J. B. (2001). “The advantages of generative grammat-
ical encodings for physical design,” in Proceedings of the 2001 Congress on
Evolutionary Computation, Seoul (Washington, DC: IEEE).
Hornby, G. S., and Pollack, J. B. (2002). Creating high-level components with a
generative representation for body-brain evolution. Artif. Life 8, 223–246.
doi:10.1162/106454602320991837
Kirschner, M., and Gerhart, J. (1998). Evolvability. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 95,
8420–8427. doi:10.1073/pnas.95.15.8420
Kistemaker, S., and Whiteson, S. (2011). “Critical factors in the performance
of novelty search,” in Proceedings of the 13th Annual Conference on Genetic
and Evolutionary Computation. GECCO ‘11, Dublin (New York, NY: ACM),
965–972.
Krcah, P. (2010). “Solving deceptive tasks in robot body-brain co-evolution by
searchingforbehavioralnovelty,”in10thInternationalConferenceonIntelligent
Systems Design and Applications (ISDA), Cairo (Washington, DC: IEEE),
284–289.
Lehman, J., Risi, S., and Clune, J. (2016). “Creative generation of 3D objects with
deep learning and innovation engines,” in Proceedings of the 7th International
Conference on Computational Creativity, Paris.
Lehman, J., and Stanley, K. O. (2008). “Exploiting open-endedness to solve prob-
lemsthroughthesearchfornovelty,”inProceedingsoftheEleventhInternational
Conference on Artificial Life (Alife XI), Winchester, eds S. Bullock, J. Noble, R.
Watson, and M. Bedau (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press).
Lehman, J., and Stanley, K. O. (2010). “Revising the evolutionary computation
abstraction: minimal criteria novelty search,” in Proceedings of the 12th Annual
Conference on Genetic and Evolutionary Computation (GECCO ‘10) (New York,
NY: ACM), 103–110.
Lehman, J., and Stanley, K. O. (2011a). Abandoning objectives: evolution
through the search for novelty alone. Evol. Comput. 19, 189–223. doi:10.1162/
EVCO_a_00025
Lehman, J., and Stanley, K. O. (2011b). “Evolving a diversity of virtual creatures
through novelty search and local competition,” in Proceedings of the 13th
Annual Conference on Genetic and Evolutionary Computation (GECCO ‘11),
Dublin (New York, NY: ACM), 211–218.
Lehman, J., and Stanley, K. O. (2013). Evolvability is inevitable: increasing evolv-
ability without the pressure to adapt. PLoS ONE 8:e62186. doi:10.1371/journal.
pone.0062186
Liapis, A., Martínez, H. P., Togelius, J., and Yannakakis, G. N. (2013a).
“Transforming exploratory creativity with delenox,” in Proceedings of the
Fourth International Conference on Computational Creativity, Sydney (Sydney:
University of Sydney).
Liapis, A., Yannakakis, G. N., and Togelius, J. (2013b). “Enhancements to con-
strained novelty search: two-population novelty search for generating game
content,” in Proceeding of the Fifteenth Annual Conference on Genetic and
Evolutionary Computation Conference, GECCO ‘13 (New York, NY: ACM),
343–350.
Mahfoud, S. W. (1995). Niching Methods for Genetic Algorithms. Ph.D. thesis,
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL.
Martinez, Y., Naredo, E., Trujillo, L., and Galvan-Lopez, E. (2013). “Searching for
novelregressionfunctions,”in2013IEEECongressonEvolutionaryComputation
(CEC), Cancun (Washington, DC: IEEE), 16–23.
Mitchell, T. M. (1997). Machine Learning. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
Morse, G., Risi, S., Snyder, C. R., and Stanley, K. O. (2013). “Single-unit pattern
generators for quadruped locomotion,” in Proceedings of the 15th Annual
ConferenceonGeneticandEvolutionaryComputation(GECCO‘13),Amsterdam
(New York, NY: ACM), 719–726.
Mouret, J.-B. (2011). “Novelty-based multiobjectivization,” in New Horizons in
Evolutionary Robotics, eds S. Doncieux, N. Bredeche, and J.-B. Mouret (Berlin,
Heidelberg: Springer), 139–154.
Mouret, J.-B., and Clune, J. (2015). Illuminating search spaces by mapping elites.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1504.04909.
Mouret, J.-B., and Doncieux, S. (2009). “Overcoming the bootstrap problem in
evolutionary robotics using behavioral diversity,” in Proceedings of the IEEE
Congress on Evolutionary Computation (CEC-2009), Trondheim (Washington,
DC: IEEE), 1161–1168.
Mouret, J.-B., and Doncieux, S. (2012). Encouraging behavioral diversity in evo-
lutionary robotics: an empirical study. Evol. Comput. 20, 91–133. doi:10.1162/
EVCO_a_00048
Naredo, E., and Trujillo, L. (2013). “Searching for novel clustering programs,”
in Proceeding of the fifteenth Annual Conference on Genetic and Evolutionary
Computation Conference. GECCO ‘13, Amsterdam (New York, NY: ACM),
1093–1100.
Nguyen, A., Yosinski, J., and Clune, J. (2015a). “Deep neural networks are easily
fooled: high confidence predictions for unrecognizable images,” in Proceedings
of the 2015 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR ‘15), Boston (Washington, DC: IEEE).
Nguyen,A.,Yosinski,J.,andClune,J. (2015b).“Innovationengines:automatedcre-
ativity and improved stochastic optimization via deep learning,” in Proceedings15
Pugh et al. Quality Diversity: A New Frontier
Frontiers in Robotics and AI | www.frontiersin.org July 2016 | Volume 3 | Article 40
of the 17th Annual Conference on Genetic and Evolutionary Computation
(GECCO ‘15) (New York, NY: ACM).
Nolfi, S., and Floreano, D. (2000). Evolutionary Robotics. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Pugh, J. K., Soros, L. B., Szerlip, P. A., and Stanley, K. O. (2015). “Confronting the
challenge of quality diversity,” in Proceedings of the 17th Annual Conference on
Genetic and Evolutionary Computation (GECCO ‘15) (New York, NY: ACM).
Risi, S., Hughes, C., and Stanley, K. (2011). Evolving plastic neural networks with
novelty search. Adapt. Behav. 18, 470–491. doi:10.1177/1059712310379923
Risi, S., and Stanley, K. O. (2013). “Confronting the challenge of learning a flexible
neural controller for a diversity of morphologies,” in Proceedings of the Genetic
and Evolutionary Computation Conference (GECCO-2013) (New York, NY:
ACM).
Risi, S., Vanderbleek, S. D., Hughes, C. E., and Stanley, K. O. (2009). “How novelty
search escapes the deceptive trap of learning to learn,” in Proceedings of the
Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference (GECCO-2009) (New York,
NY: ACM).
Rumelhart, D. E., Hinton, G. E., and Williams, R. J. (1986). “Learning internal rep-
resentations by error propagation,” in Parallel Distributed Processing, Vol. 1 eds
J. L. McClelland and D. L. Rumelhart (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press), 318–362.
Schwefel, H.-P. P. (1993). Evolution and Optimum Seeking: The Sixth Generation.
New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Simon, H. A. (1957). Models of Man: Social and Rational – Mathematical Essays on
Rational Human Behavior in a Social Setting. New York, NY: Wiley.
Soltoggio, A., and Jones, B. (2009). “Novelty of behaviour as a basis for the neu-
ro-evolution of operant reward learning,” in Proceedings of the 11th Annual
Conference on Genetic and Evolutionary Computation GECCO ‘09 (New York,
NY: ACM), 169–176.
Standish, R. K. (2003). Open-ended artificial evolution. Int. J. Comput. Intell. Appl.
3, 167–175. doi:10.1142/S1469026803000914
Stanley, K. O. (2007). “Compositional pattern producing networks: a novel
abstraction of development,” in Genetic Programming and Evolvable Machines
Special Issue on Developmental Systems, Vol. 8 (Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer),
131–162.
Stanley, K. O. (2011). “Why evolutionary robotics will matter,” in New Horizons in
Evolutionary Robotics, eds S. Doncieux, N. Bredeche, and J.-B. Mouret (Berlin,
Heidelberg: Springer), 37–41.
Stanley, K. O., and Miikkulainen, R. (2002). Evolving neural networks
through augmenting topologies. Evol. Comput. 10, 99–127. doi:10.1162/
106365602320169811
Stanley, K. O., and Miikkulainen, R. (2003). A taxonomy for artificial embryogeny.
Artif. Life 9, 93–130. doi:10.1162/106454603322221487
Szerlip, P., and Stanley, K. O. (2013). “Indirectly encoded sodarace for artificial
life,” in Proceedings of the European Conference on Artificial Life (ECAL-2013),
Taormina Vol. 12 (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press), 218–225.
Szerlip, P. A., Morse, G., Pugh, J. K., and Stanley, K. O. (2015). “Unsupervised
feature learning through divergent discriminative feature accumulation,” in
Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence
(AAAI-2015) (Menlo Park, CA: AAAI Press).
Trujillo, L., Olague, G., Lutton, E., and De Vega, F. F. (2008). “Discovering several
robotbehaviorsthroughspeciation,”inApplicationsofEvolutionaryComputing
(Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer), 164–174.
Trujillo,L.,Olague,G.,Lutton,E.,DeVega,F.F.,Dozal,L.,andClemente,E.(2011).
Speciationinbehavioralspaceforevolutionaryrobotics.J. Intell.Robot.Syst.64,
323–351. doi:10.1007/s10846-011-9542-z
Velez,R.,andClune,J. (2014).“Noveltysearchcreatesrobotswithgeneralskillsfor
exploration,” in Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Genetic and Evolutionary
Computation, GECCO ‘14 (New York, NY: ACM), 737–744.
Woolley, B. G., and Stanley, K. O. (2011). “On the deleterious effects of a priori
objectives on evolution and representation,” in GECCO ‘11: Proceedings of the
13th Annual Conference on Genetic and Evolutionary Computation (Dublin,
Ireland: ACM), 957–964.
Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was con-
ducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be
construed as a potential conflict of interest.
Copyright © 2016 Pugh, Soros and Stanley. This is an open-access article distributed
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use,
distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original
author(s) or licensor are credited and that the original publication in this journal
is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or
reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.16
Pugh et al. Quality Diversity: A New Frontier
Frontiers in Robotics and AI | www.frontiersin.org July 2016 | Volume 3 | Article 40
APPENDIX
Algorithm Descriptions
This section provides pseudocode for selected algorithms
(particularly studies that were not published previously). Some
algorithms represent trivial modifications to existing algorithms,
in which case only the modifications are shown. In all cases, g
representsanindividualgenome,Brepresentsabatchofgenomes
(batch size: bsize), R represents the novelty archive (maximum
archive size: rmax), and P represents the population or the MAP-
Elites grid (population size: psize). Following NEAT (Stanley
and Miikkulainen, 2002), genomes are initialized with minimal
complexity; additional neurons and connections are added later
through mutations.
Algorithm 1 | MAP-Elites + Novelty (MENOV)
1: Generate and evaluate B random genomes
2: for all g ∈ B do
3: Add g to R
4: Map g to its corresponding grid bin
5: if g.fitness > bin.fitness then
6: Save g in the bin (discard current occupant)
7: else
8: Discard g
9: end if
10: end for
11: Calculate novelty scores for all g ∈ P (against R ∪ P)
12: loop
13: Select bsize parents from P with chance proportional to novelty score
14: Generate and evaluate B offspring as asexual mutations of selected
parents
15: for all g ∈ B do
16: Add g to R
17: Map g to its corresponding grid bin
18: If g.fitness > bin.fitness then
19: Save g in the bin (discard current occupant)
20: else
21: Discard g
22: end if
23: end for
24: Calculate novelty scores for all g ∈ P (against R ∪ P)
25: Calculate novelty scores for all g ∈ R (against R ∪ P)
26: while R.count > rmax do
27: Discard g ∈ R with lowest novelty score
28: end while
29: end loop
Algorithm 2 | MAP-Elites + Passive Genetic Diversity (MEPGD)
1: Generate and evaluate B random genomes
2: for all g ∈ B do
3: Map g to its corresponding grid bin
4: if g.fitness > bin.fitness then
5: Save g in the primary bin (discard current occupant)
6: else if random: 30% chance then
7: Save g in the secondary bin (discard current occupant)
8: else
9: Discard g
10: end if
11: end for
12: loop
13: Select bsize parents from P (uniform random chance)
14: Generate and evaluate B offspring as asexual mutations of selected
parents
15: for all g ∈ B do
16: Map g to its corresponding grid bin
17: if g.fitness > bin.fitness then
18: Save g in the primary bin (discard current occupant)
19: else if random: 30% chance then
20: Save g in the secondary bin (discard current occupant)
21: else
22: Discard g
23: end if
24: end for
25: end loop
Algorithm 3 | Multi-BC Novelty Search with Local Competition (NS-NSLC)
1: Generate and evaluate B random genomes
2: Add B to R1 (aligned BC)
3: Add B to R2 (unaligned BC)
4: Add B to P
5: for all g ∈ P do
6: Calculate novelty score g.nov1 (against R1 ∪ P with aligned BC)
7: Calculate novelty score g.nov2 (against R2 ∪ P with unaligned BC)
8: Calculate local competition g.lc (against R2 ∪ P with unaligned BC)
9: end for
10: Pareto-rank all g ∈ P according to (g.nov1, g.nov2, g.lc)
11: loop
12: Select bsize parents from P with chance inversely proportional to Pareto
rank
13: Generate and evaluate B offspring as asexual mutations of selected
parents
14: Add B to R1 (aligned BC)
15: Add B to R2 (unaligned BC)
16: Add B to P
17: for all g ∈ P do
18: Calculate novelty score g.nov1 (against R1 ∪ P with aligned BC)
19: Calculate novelty score g.nov2 (against R2 ∪ P with unaligned BC)
20: Calculate local competition g.lc (against R2 ∪ P with unaligned BC)
21: end for
22: Pareto-rank all g ∈ P according to (g.nov1, g.nov2, g.lc)
23: Calculate novelty score g.nov1 for all g ∈ R1 (against R1 ∪ P with aligned
BC)
24: Calculate novelty score g.nov2 for all g ∈ R2 (against R2 ∪ P with
unaligned BC)
25: while P.count > psize do
26: Discard g ∈ P with worst Pareto rank
27: end while
28: while R1.count > r1max do
29: Discard g ∈ R1 with lowest novelty score g.nov1
30: end while
31: while R2.count > r2max do
32: Discard g ∈ R2 with lowest novelty score g.nov2
33: end while
34: end loop
Algorithm 4 | Multi-BC Novelty Search (NS-NS)
NS-NS works exactly the same as NS-NSLC, except the LC objective is removed.
Modifications to Algorithm 3:
• Remove lines 8 and 20
• Change lines 10 and 22 to:
Pareto-rank all g ∈ P according to (g.nov1, g.nov2)
Algorithm 5 | Multi-BC MAP-Elites + Novelty (MENOV-MENOV)
1: Generate and evaluate B random genomes
2: for all g ∈ B do17
Pugh et al. Quality Diversity: A New Frontier
Frontiers in Robotics and AI | www.frontiersin.org July 2016 | Volume 3 | Article 40
3: Add g to R1 (aligned BC)
4: Add g to R2 (unaligned BC)
5: Map g to its corresponding grid bin in P1 (aligned BC)
6: if g.fitness > bin.fitness then
7: Save g in the bin (discard current occupant)
8: else
9: Discard g
10: end if
11: Map g to its corresponding grid bin in P2 (unaligned BC)
12: if g.fitness > bin.fitness then
13: Save g in the bin (discard current occupant)
14: else
15: Discard g
16: end if
17: end for
18: Calculate novelty scores g.nov1 for all g ∈ P1 (against R1 ∪ P1 with aligned
BC)
19: Calculate novelty scores g.nov2 for all g ∈ P2 (against R2 ∪ P2 with
unaligned BC)
20: loop
21: Select bsize/2 parents from P1 with chance proportional to novelty score
g.nov1
22: Select bsize/2 parents from P2 with chance proportional to novelty score
g.nov2
23: Generate and evaluate B offspring as asexual mutations of selected
parents
24: for all g ∈ B do
25: Add g to R1 (aligned BC)
26: Add g to R2 (unaligned BC)
27: Map g to its corresponding grid bin in P1 (aligned BC)
28: if g.fitness > bin.fitness then
29: Save g in the bin (discard current occupant)
30: else
31: Discard g
32: end if
33: Map g to its corresponding grid bin in P2 (unaligned BC)
34: if g.fitness > bin.fitness then
35: Save g in the bin (discard current occupant)
36: else
37: Discard g
38: end if
39: end for
40: Calculate novelty scores g.nov1 for all g ∈ P1 (against R1 ∪ P1 with
aligned BC)
41: Calculate novelty scores g.nov2 for all g ∈ P2 (against R2 ∪ P2 with
unaligned BC)
42: Calculate novelty scores g.nov1 for all g ∈ R1 (against R1 ∪ P1 with
aligned BC)
43: Calculate novelty scores g.nov2 for all g ∈ R2 (against R2 ∪ P2 with
unaligned BC)
44: while R1.count > r1max do
45: Discard g ∈ R1 with lowest novelty score g.nov1
46: end while
47: while R2.count > r2max do
48: Discard g ∈ R2 with lowest novelty score g.nov2
49: end while
50: end loop
Algorithm 6 | Multi-BC MAP-Elites (ME-ME)
ME-ME works similarly to MENOV-MENOV, except selection is uniform rather than
proportional to novelty scores (thus there is no need for novelty archives R1 and R2).
Modifications to Algorithm 5:
• Remove lines 3–4, 17–18, 25–26, and 40–49
• Change lines 21–22 to:
Select bsize/2 parents from P1 (uniform random chance)
Select bsize/2 parents from P2 (uniform random chance)